Have we got you there?
Joe Hughes?
Is somebody else coming in from the government?
Good afternoon. Can you see and hear us now?
Y Yes. We've got, um, quorum
and it's one minute past three. Well,
Hang on a second. Francisco
and I are not part of the government.
Have we got a government quorum here?
Yes. Yes, we have. We've got six, haven't we?
No, no, no. Sorry. We, we are waiting for Dr. David.
Oh, sorry. I called counted six.
That's okay. We will, um, I've just messaged him now.
Um, I'll try calling him one moment there, Mr. Chair.
Oh, sorry. I was, when I exceeded we got six.
I I wasn't being silly. I thought we had,
So we do technically have quorum
because it's just any members,
but it's, I am prepared to shut down and leave.
Um, but if we know that he's coming
shortly, we can carry on.
Can I just check while we're waiting
that you can hear me committee?
Yep. Yeah, yeah, we can. Um, Mr.
Chair, we have got 10 minutes within standing orders anyway,
so should we punch on, uh, yeah, well just, let's see
what Dan's out, out outcome is.
You are saying we've got, we've got 10 minutes
to secure a quorum. Yeah.
Mm-hmm. He's not answering team.
Um, so we do technically a quorum,
but, um, if labor wishes to
bail, we may, oh,
We, we've got 10 minutes still, Dan.
Yeah. Um, so Mr. Clark,
we can proceed even without a government
quorum for the first 10 minutes.
No. Oh yeah, technically,
but the minutes meeting, minutes after 10 minutes,
You've minutes. Hang on.
Hang on. Dr. Russell.
Um, Liam, uh, yeah, can we, um, can we continue for 10
for till 10 past three without a government quorum while Dr.
Wilson's making his way?
Uh, yeah, you could. Um, but
Well, no, because Francisco and I can leave right now
'cause the meeting hasn't started yet,
and then you've got 10 minutes
to get your quorum for the meeting to start.
Otherwise, the whole thing collapses.
Well, the meeting actually has started.
Well, no, it hasn't, it hasn't been called
to order, and I'm
Saying it, we haven't, it was, we called
to order Dr. Russell Parliament, Dr. Russell,
And arranged for a quorum.
You can do that. We'll have 10 minutes.
It was called to order when
you were at actually in the room. So
In that case, it couldn't have been done
because you didn't have a government quorum at that stage.
Yes. No, we had, we had a quorum.
Francisco you prepared to turn off
and walk out for the time being.
We'll wait for a message till
they've got a government quorum.
Sure. Thank you.
So just turn us off so we're
technically not in this meeting anymore.
Okay. Look, let's just, um,
we're not an open session at the moment, are we?
Sorry, uh, to our treasury leaders.
Um, let's just see if we can get Dr. Wilson online
or at least, um, uh, one of our government colleagues.
No trouble. Um, thank you for that.
Such as, um, democracy, standing orders
and get the, the necessity to get a government quorum, uh,
which we have now secured.
So, um, look, thank you for your written submission.
Uh, thank you, uh, um, um, for all the work you did,
you know, leading, uh, supporting the banking inquiry
along with, with others.
Um, so we look forward to your, um, presentation
and then we'll leave plenty of time for,
um, questions you've got.
We've got 15 minutes allocated. Thank you.
Great. Thanks for your time and having us here today.
Um, as you've heard from other agencies, there's a lot
of work going on across government to respond
to the recommendations of the inquiry, um, as well
as playing an overall coordination role in
monitoring that response.
Um, there's also some key areas
that Treasury has been playing more of a leadership role
that I thought I'd just quickly rattle
through for you today.
Um, they were the same ones as covered in our submission,
but I thought I could just give you a little bit more color.
Um, so in terms
of the third recommendation on strengthening Kiwi Bank
through investment, um, you'll be aware that, um,
following the outcomes of the Reserve Bank's Capital Review
and some other capital raising it did
through its $400 million tier two capital raise,
Kiwi BUILD decided that it was not going
to proceed at this time with its other capital raises
and that it could, um, continue
to get strong growth in the medium term without additional
equity going forward, though Treasury will continue
to monitor Kiwi Bank's lending growth
and to engage with it, um,
going forward about its capital needs.
In relation to recommendation five
on revisiting the Reserve Bank's Prudential policy role,
a key focus for us over recent months has been supporting
the establishment of the RBN Z's Financial Policy Committee,
which as you'll be aware, is now up and running.
We did also provide advice on the, um, role of competition
and efficiency considerations in the Prudential framework,
including whether a legislative option
to include them, um, was an option.
So we advised on a range of options there,
but on balance, we recommended not pursuing legislative
change at this time, but instead focusing on continuing
to strengthen the framework
through existing instruments such as the remit,
the financial policy remit.
Um, we've also supported work led
by other agencies in particular recommendations six there
around the Reserve Bank's review
of its capital requirements.
So we played a testing role there.
Um, challenging and testing the analysis of the,
the bank's analytical team around that, including, um,
reviewing submissions
and the reviews of the international experts.
And then just, um, talking
to the bank about the key judgements
they've made in that analysis.
Um, recommendation 10 on realtime payments,
you will have heard from the Reserve Bank
that they are assuming a,
a leadership role there on across government
and with industry project there on product payment system
modernization that treasury is a will be involved in both at
the governance and working level.
And finally, recommendation 18.
Um, this is on, um, Maori access to capital.
Um, we are working alongside
and other infrastructure agencies
and Porta of Year's Forum to progress that recommendation,
particularly with reference
to enabling Maori co-investment and infrastructure.
Um, so that's a bit of a summary,
but obviously happy to take any
thoughts or questions from you.
Okay. Members,
uh, any any comments
or clarity, uh, Todd Stevenson add? Yeah,
Uh, just a quick one. Thank
you for that and thank you for your submission.
Just in relation to payments New Zealand,
your role though is just more looking at some of the, uh,
uh, uh, obviously the technical things, not,
you're not involved in any of the governance review
or, um, ownership
of payments in New Zealand. Would that be right?
No, that's right. So payments in New Zealand, as you know,
is industry led and owned.
Yes. Um, what this modernization piece is doing is taking a
cross governance, cross government government,
excuse me, view Yeah.
Of the payment system we want of the future.
So obviously payments in New Zealand
and the industry are quite important in that,
but not so much the governance of payments New Zealand.
I just wanted to Yeah, just wanted to clarify that.
Thank you. That's useful. Thank you.
Just, um, a question from me.
What do you see as Treasury's role?
Um, as far as the monitoring, you know, we've obviously got,
um, ComCom and RBNZ and others,
but, um, what do you see as treasury's role?
Um, as far as the monitoring of open banking, uh,
with it becoming a, uh, requirement from, um,
for the four big ones on one December
and for Kiwi Bank, uh, in the middle of the year.
So in the first instance, that would be a lead of MB
as the policy lead there.
Um, but given that it is an important open banking,
continuing to, to grow is important for the stream of work,
we'll certainly be taking an interest in
how it's progressing and monitoring it
as part of the government's response.
Okay. And, um, as far as the Prudential Policy Committee,
the Financial Policy Committee, um, you'll be watching that,
uh, by Reserve Bank.
Um, you'll be watching, that's establishment
and that's first meeting
and, uh, its charter with interest as well.
And, and what kind of interaction will you have be will you
have, um, with RBNZ, uh, on that nons statutory committee?
Yes, and so look, we were quite involved in its
establishment and very supportive.
So for example, I was an independent member on the panel
for the selection of members of that panel.
We also provided, uh, feedback on the charter
with a particular interest in the transparency elements of
that and making sure that given the important decisions
that made, there's good transparency around it.
Um, it is something, given that it's a, a subcommittee
of the board, it's certainly something we'll be taking an
interest in through our monitoring role.
We also, um, in terms of the Prudential policy itself,
will continue to interact with the bank's executive
and the way we did on the capital review to help, um,
make sure the analysis is, is strong that's going
for advice to that committee. So we,
How much, okay. Good. How
much, how much transparency do you think, um,
there should be, uh, with the,
with the financial policy committee's, um, agendas
and with their minutes
and, you know, the, what,
what decisions were made in meetings?
Um, so we are supportive of a high degree
of transparency around that.
So we were comfortable with
where the charter got on those matters.
Um, we do think over time it is important that the, the bank
as a whole committee is, is clear about, um,
what things it's considering open with consultation
and then clear about the decision making. Okay.
Right. I'm gonna go to Ryan Hamilton
S sorry, that was a big faux part for a Monday.
Um, thanks treasury for that report.
Um, I'd just be interested in your general synopsis on
how you think the, the six monthly review settings have gone
for us in terms of general feedback.
Um, my view was that it was, it was positive
and there's a lot of traction
and, uh, collaboration across the banks.
Um, that's my first question
and I'll just come to another one.
Yeah, we'd agree. Um, we think that, you know, some
of the highlights are the open banking piece,
the Reserve Bank capital piece, which both
of those are quite wide and deep and have quite big impacts.
And then also there's, um,
forward progress on things like payments modernization.
So we think it's a very promising start.
Yeah. And, um, obviously the Reserve Bank still, uh,
undertaking some work around SA and definition of banks and,
and those sort of things came up a few times
with the FinTech reports.
Um, so I guess you'll be having a watching brief on those
transactions as well, or development.
That's right, certainly, certainly
as we keep monitoring the Reserve Bank's financial policy
remit, which has a, the bank taking, having regard for, um,
competition, we'll be continuing to monitor those and,
and look at what other things the
bank's doing in that regard.
Yeah. And also the FMA obviously had some good, um,
progress around sandbox and they were keen to, um, sort
of continue to expand that work
and, um, we're seeing some good fruit flow through
and good interagency, um, cooperation.
Yeah, absolutely. And I think you heard from the financial
markets authority about the, the new refreshed
and sharpened Council of Financial regulators,
which effectively contains all of the agencies here.
So that provides a really useful forum for us
to continue working on these things
and on issues as they emerge.
Yeah. Thanks. And finally, chair, um, yeah,
the West Westpac Bank actually
provided a helpful sort of one pager in terms of the,
the overlapping, um, I guess in some cases duplication
between the, the various entities
and how, uh, COFI was trying to tidy up some of
that efficiencies,
and I guess you'll be watching that with interest as well.
Yes, and I think that's one of the things that as,
as government agencies, we need
to always be keeping an eye on and and alert to.
Thank you. Okay. Okay. Thank you, uh, Mr. Hamilton.
And, and thank you, uh, Ms. Hughes from the, uh, treasury.
We appreciate the, uh,
your written response six months on from our banking inquiry
and, uh, you know, we look forward to keeping in touch.
Great. Thanks Kelly. And
Thank you for appearing before us this afternoon.
No trouble. Okay.
Uh, Mr. Clark, can we just, uh,
eloquently just, uh, go from, um, the banking inquiry, uh,
through to the budget policy statement, um,
presentation submissions?
Yes. We'll bring the next submitters in now.
Okay. We've got the Royal College of Pathologists
of Australasia just changing pace now.
Uh, welcome Dr. Uh, Winnick as well.
Okay. Right. We got Mrs. Uh, Cox, right there.
Thank you for your presentation
to our budget policy statement.
It feels like a long time ago, um,
being the 16th of December, uh, when it was published.
Um, we've got your written submission
and you as an organization have got 10 minutes.
So we're, we're in your hands.
Wonderful. Thank you, chair. Um, so I'm Francis.
I'm the, um, policy
and advocacy manager for New Zealand, for the Royal College
of Pathologists for Australasia.
And I'm here with associate professor Diane Kenwright,
who's the New Zealand Vice President for the college.
We are really grateful for the OP opportunity to present
to this committee today.
Um, and we are here to convey with urgency
that the government needs to fund pathology training now
before the opportunity is gone.
So we really urge you to use Budget 2026
to address the pathology workforce crisis
by making the modest but impactful investment
to immediately increase the number
of pathologists training positions by 25%
and begin to, to grow the pipeline of pathologists
who replenish the New Zealand workforce with funding.
This is possible.
Now, pathologists are, of course,
the medical doctors you don't often see
yet from the labor laboratories.
They provide the diagnoses that underpin the vast majority
of patient care decisions, including a hundred percent
of cancer diagnoses.
We want to be clear upfront.
The reason that you need to do this now is
because we still have experienced pathologists in the
workforce to train the next generation in New Zealand.
Over 40% of pathologists in some disciplines are aged
60 or older.
Imminent retirements will make it significantly more
difficult and more expensive to train
or source New Zealand's pathology workforce.
So the window to act is open, but it will not stay open.
New Zealand currently has 30 unfilled pathologist positions,
that's 13% of the entire workforce vacant today,
and without action, that grows
to a projected 74 unfilled positions by 2037.
These are not abstract statistics.
Um, these are diagnoses delayed.
These are cancer patients waiting longer than they should
for the results that determine their treatment
in every interaction I have with New Zealand pathologists,
workforce is a serious concern while they're dealing
with workload pressure
and case overloads while they're busy integrating AI into
their practice while they're upskilling in genomics
to deliver personalized medicine.
And while they're managing an explosion in the complexity
of cancer diagnostics.
At the top of this, they care about outcomes for patients,
and so many are deeply committed
to training the future workforce.
They see how the status quo
of unfunded training capacity translates to the delays
for patients in whanau on the other end
of every specimen they see.
And the pre and the pressure on those
pathologists is growing.
Diagnostics are becoming more sophisticated.
Personalized medicine has arrived.
Bowel, breast and cervical screening programs are expanding.
The complexity and volume of
what pathologists are doing is increasing.
Every year, this government has made
commitments to New Zealanders.
90% of cancer patients treated within 31 days,
95% seen by a specialist within four months.
These targets have yet to be met.
Funding the screening test before pathology,
and the treatment after it without resourcing the pathology
and the diagnostics in between means
that the government creates a bottleneck.
Those investments in treating, in testing
and treatment lose their impact,
and that is wasted spending.
You cannot treat cancer faster if you
cannot diagnose it faster.
Every health government, uh,
every health target this government has set requires a
pathologist in the chain.
It's overly hopeful to think that we can recruit our way out
of this from overseas.
The global pathology workforce is constrained.
Every country is facing this, and the evidence is clear.
90% of recent New Zealand medical graduates remain here
for at least five years compared to just 40%
of overseas trained doctors who stay in New Zealand.
After two years, training our own people is the smarter,
more sustainable investment
and 3.7 million in new funding per year.
That is a fraction of
what we would spend managing the downstream consequences.
Those are late latest stage cancer diagnoses,
longer hospital stays,
and the compounding costs of a system
that cannot keep pace with demand.
This investment pays for itself within five to seven years.
As 117 new pathologists would enter the workforce up 23,
um, from what the current funding would deliver.
We want you to consider this an easy one.
We are not here asking you to solve a complex problem.
The solution exists.
It is being designed collaboratively between the RCPA
and te your own officials agree
with us on what's needed and how to get there.
A funding gap and only a funding gap stands in the way.
How often does that happen? You have agreement,
you've got a workforce of pathologists motivated
and ready to implement.
Infrastructure is already in place.
No new laboratories are needed.
No new systems need to be built, just funding.
We simply urge you to make this modest investment.
Honor the commitment to health targets
and to the health of New Zealanders fund the solution.
Now, while the experienced pathologists
who will train the next generation are still here to do it,
prevent New Zealand from having to fund a more expensive,
more complex fix that comes too late
and costs patients their health.
This proposal delivers on all three
of the government's budget, 2026 priorities.
It's core public services.
It addresses long-term productivity.
And at 3.7 million in new funding,
it's fiscally responsible budget.
2026 is the opportunity to act,
it's the right investment at the right
time for the right reasons.
Thank you, and we're happy to take your questions.
Okay. Thank you very much. I'm gonna go to, uh, Dr.
Vanessa Winnick.
Thank you chair. Um, just wondering, uh, uh,
how you've come across about this avenue of, um, advocacy
and whether you've spoken
to the Minister of Health about this.
Uh, we've met with the Minister of Health, um,
recently about specific recent decisions.
Um, the diagnostic improvement plan was one of those
that really impacted pathology, um,
and we've been working with,
and we just wanted to make this budget submission, um,
because the evidence
that informs this is relatively recent.
It's from 2024 and 2025.
Um, so this kind of validated, um, capacity hasn't always,
well, the capacity hasn't always been validated
and it's here now, and we had to, um, make
that opportunity count with the budget policy statement.
Um, but we haven't specifically, um, addressed this
with the Minister of Health O Okay.
On this issue in its niche, I suppose.
Okay. Thank you. Thanks. Okay. Uh, Dr. Deborah,
Um, thank you for, um, uh, talking to us today.
You mentioned that, um,
cancer diagnoses are getting more complex.
Is that because there are more ways that we can diagnose
and more things that can be diagnosed or
because the cancers themselves are getting more complex?
I might let, uh,
Dr. Diane Kim Wright answer that one for us.
Thank you. In order to treat them more effectively,
more information is demanded of us.
Um, we need to be able to do more prognostic testing,
but also more therapeutic testing
because there's new drugs come out, then, um, we,
the pathologists have
to diagnose whether those cancers will in
fact respond to them.
In addition, um,
the clinicians really need more information about delivering
radiation in the right places
and where the people who can help with that.
Thank you. Okay. Thank you very much.
Have we got any other questions or, or points?
Uh, Ms. Todd Stevenson,
Just one last, last one.
Thank you very much. It was a very clear presentation
and a very clear ask.
I think it's great. You've been working
with Health New Zealand.
I, I'm assuming of their kind of,
because they've got a massive budget, right?
They've got 32 billion do around $32 billion a year.
I'm assuming they've said to you, oh,
they can't find the money you need within their budget
For Yes, so for the increase.
So we've got an agreed direction,
and they also agree that, you know, they agree with our, um,
our workforce projection data, um,
but the funding to make that 25% increase, um,
they have said that they don't have,
or that that will be the challenge that we wanted to assist
by bringing this to the government's attention,
um, through this avenue.
Okay. Thank you. Okay.
We will leave it there with the Royal Colleges College
of Pathologists of Australasia.
So, um, thank you very much. Thank you for your written
and, uh, oral presentation today.
All the best. Thank you. Okay.
That takes us to the Salvation Army.
Uh, Mr. Clark, we've got, uh, Paul Barber as he, um,
from the social policy and parliamentary unit.
Is he, uh, online? Yes. He's just joining now.
Uh, Mr. Barber, good to see you again.
Thank your, so just, uh,
Yeah, you are well familiar with this, uh, process.
Um, you've got 10 minutes,
we've got your written submission.
We look forward to your presentation
and hopefully some time for questions.
Well, um, thank you for the opportunity to, uh, talk
to you, to the finance, um, and expenditure committee today.
Uh, yes, you have a submission in front of you.
Um, I'm here today present with my colleague, um, Anna Ika,
um, uh, who has also joined us online.
Um, and I guess my first comment is that our work,
our submission is informed by the experience
of the more than 130,000 people
that the Salvation Army works with each year.
And, uh, I guess our submission makes three key points.
Um, firstly that, uh, you know,
this, people are in this country experiencing huge
and sustained pressures such as rising living costs,
food insecurity, housing instability,
and unmet health and addiction needs.
Um, and we're making it clear
that we think these things need immediate attention, uh,
in this budget, and they can't wait till
an economic recovery happens.
We believe that the approach to fiscal
restraint outlined in the budget policy statement risks
worsening hardship and harm.
And we believe the budget of the government needs to take,
um, stronger and broader approach to social investment
in the budget that balances borrowing and spending,
but expanding access to wise, uh, spending on, uh, stable
and affordable housing, improved child wellbeing,
and better mental health and addiction support.
Um, I'm gonna hand over to Anna to talk about, um,
the food security and reintegration parts of our,
of submission, and I'll finish off with some comments
around homelessness.
Over to you, Anna.
Okay, good afternoon, Anna. Oh, good afternoon.
Um, Tierra
and Committee, um, thank you again for the opportunity
to speak, um, to our submission.
I'm just gonna touch on two of the points that we've made,
um, in our submission around
reintegration and food insecurity.
Um, look, over the past year, um, our state
of the nation showed that our prison population has
increased, um, by 9%, um,
and sits at around 10,000, um,
sits at over 10,000 currently incarcerated.
I guess the, the, the challenge, uh, for us, uh, then is
around the other end in regards to recidivism,
which also increased in the past year.
I mean, 40, 43 0.2% of people are more likely
to be re imprisoned.
Um, and 59% of people are more likely to be reconvicted, uh,
for the Salvation Army.
We work on that sharper end, um, of, of reintegration.
And so, um, we wanted to highlight in regards to the, the,
the, the impact that reintegration support services having
particularly supportive housing.
'cause housing is often the bottleneck.
Um, and Salvation Army works with, um, medium
to serious offenders, um, particularly when, um, you know,
they're going through parole and, um,
that there's no secure accommodation for them, uh,
that can often, um, that can often be become a blockade, uh,
for people coming out of prison.
And so, uh, for us in the reintegration space,
I think providing an alternative
or helping people get back on their feet, um,
and finding another pathway in life that's really important
to us, and particularly if we are gonna see more people, uh,
being incarcerated, um, we also need to see
that same investment on the other end.
Instead of us spending, I think it's about $550, uh,
per cent prisoner per day, um,
and around $440 per day for a reman, um, per, uh,
someone who is in, in remand in custody.
And so, um, you know, we know that, um,
supportive accommodation for those coming out, um,
of prison really makes a difference and can,
and set them, um, in an alternative pathway from the, the,
the current pathway that they're on now.
Um, we recently did an evaluation last year in our
integration services, and a lot of the feedback from those
that we supported talked about how, you know,
being incarcerated for so long
and coming out is, it's, it's scary,
but having a safe space in place to be able to come to, um,
for them to be able to get back on their feet really makes
a difference, uh, for them.
In addition to, to that, um,
there's supportive accommodation.
It was, it was also wrapped around
with the Salvation Army's pastoral, um, community welfare
services that we also provide, um, together with, uh,
with all of our services.
Um, so, uh, that's why we're trying to get across
to the committee the, the difference, um, in the savings
that it will make in regards to investing.
I think there was about 380 million that was
invested last year, um,
which is only about $8 million
addition to the year prior to that.
Um, but, um, if, if we continue
to under invest in reintegration, we could continue
to push this issue down the road
and it's gonna be more expensive.
And just such quickly in regards to food insecurity, um,
the Salvation Army, um,
from December, 2025 gave out over 90,000 food parcels.
And I guess for, for, for us, that's a key part of our copa.
We have food banks right across the country.
Uh, food is often the, the tip of the iceberg.
And when we sit with our wau
and actually, um, look at the reasons why they're coming in
for food, um, it's often, um, you know, financial hardship,
living cost challenges, I mean, myriad of other issues.
And, and, and also, um, in regards
to the challenges it's been with MSD, um, as recently, um,
in getting, um, hardship grants, like I just looked up our,
um, you know, how many food parcel we've given out in
February, it's the 23rd of February,
we've given out almost 5,000 food parcels
that's about a food parcel every seven minutes.
Um, so that's just to signify that I guess the need that,
the need at, on the surface, um,
that we are facing in regards to the cost of living crisis,
uh, for New Zealand is we are not, we are unsure in regards
to whether a budget 2026 has anything allocated towards the
food insecurity area.
Um, but that's something that we wanna, uh,
get across the line that, um, it,
it is significantly challenging for our families out there.
And the most imminent need,
particularly in the firstborn nation like New Zealand, um,
is to ensure that we have enough inadequate food,
uh, for our communities.
And so just wanting to relay the challenges in regards
to the food security space
and Salvation Army works right on the ground,
but also trying to look across, um, a a across
with our mark on a strategy
and how do we, um,
alleviate food insecurity across the board.
Um, and so those are the, the two points I just wanted
to highlight, and I'll hand it back to Paul.
Yeah, thanks, Ana. But I just wanna finish
with some comments around homelessness
because, um, homelessness and,
and housing insecurity is rising and continues to rise,
and it needs urgent attention in budget 2026 and beyond.
Um, the homelessness briefings
that we've been preparing over the past two years, along
with other NGOs, um, have, have shown,
highlighted the increasing homelessness as well
as limited access to services
and support to help help people out of, uh, housing
and security and street homelessness.
In our December, 2025 briefing of the 21 interviews
around the 10 centers we did
or reported either increased homelessness or no change.
Um, and we, we do not support criminal based approaches such
as those proposed in the directions direction
to move on Bill yesterday.
These do not do anything
to help people actually who need a home.
The budget needs to address the fact
that there's currently $79 million less funding, um,
for the services, uh,
that are going into proven in responses to people in need
of, in high housing needs, such
as housing first in transitional housing
as there was in the previous, uh, year.
Um, that is not a solution to homelessness.
Similarly, emergency housing hardship grants from MSD are
now extremely difficult, almost impossible to get
for many people yet we have 19,500 households waiting on the
housing register for social housing.
The number of new housing,
social housing units added in the past six months was 208
as a result of the government's funding review.
Kaing Water has already said, has no plans
to further increase its current stock
of 78,000 housing units,
but the, the community housing sector is growing rapidly,
um, reaching 14,300 units this year.
Um, and that's thanks to great good policy changes
that have been made in, in recent years, um, such as along
with access to credit and borrowing,
but we need another 20,000 places now.
And, um, the co community housing sector
cannot do that on its own.
Social housing is a proven form of social investment,
and we urge the government to approach its budget in 2026
to recognize both, uh, the,
and take into account huge health
and social benefits that go along with, uh,
good quality social housing and that the financial costs
and fiscal costs need to be seen Beside
that in budget decision making, there's a lot,
a lot more can be said, but I will leave at that
and, um, hopefully have some time for questions. Thank you.
Okay, thank you. I'm gonna go to Dr. Megan Woods.
Thank you. And thank you very much for your submission.
Um, and thank you for the work that you do on the ground,
but also equally thank you for the policy advocacy
that you've, um, done for a number of decades.
I think it's really useful.
Just really want to ask some questions where you left off
around the decrease in support for homelessness.
We've seen $79 million cut, um, from
that area in the last financial year.
We've also seen half the number of new, uh, public housing
and transitional housing, um,
coming on stream in this financial year.
Um, when you look at those figures
that we are seeing $552 a day to incarcerate someone,
uh, for the, um, three months, 49,000, what are the kinds
of costs that, um, that our NGOs such
as yourselves when we are working
through a housing first model or,
or community support around homelessness,
what are those kind of costs look like for you?
Um, well that's, um, part of the point really is
that there's a whole interaction of, of costs here.
Um, we have people, um, who are coming out of, uh, prison
and not having options, uh, housing options for instance.
Um, and that's one of the key issues
for the reintegration work.
Um, we have people struggling with multiple, um, issues, um,
either therefore coming into homelessness
because they can't afford, uh, rents
or they're facing, um, issues with addictions
and mental health that, um, make it harder for them
to sustain, um, housing.
Uh, and what the frontline feedback to us
around this is this complexity for people that, um,
we cannot treat this as a one.
You know, there's no one solution in responding
to homelessness and that solution belong is, is woven in
with those other, um, responses around justice
and reintegration, we trying to say, communicate
around dealing with child poverty and hardship.
So, um, it's not, there's an
enormous social benefit from doing some things
that are difficult and costly,
but are definitely deliver more benefit than, um,
Cost. Given this as
a, um, the, the budget policy statement
question, what could our community involuntary sector do,
um, with $552 a day to help those people
that are homeless in our communities?
I'm assuming, um, that the budgets
that you have are $552 a day for each individual.
Um, to be honest, I couldn't tell you
what the budget per day is for individuals,
but certainly, uh, the resourcing,
it would be a far better investment of resources, uh, into,
um, improving people's lives rather than having people,
um, incarcerated.
Okay. We're gonna go to, um, Francisco Hernandez.
Uh, thank you chair. Final question. Thank you.
Um, I'm interested in, um, some of the, um,
stats you raised then around the food ban usage of $5,000,
uh, sorry, 5,000, um, parcels by February.
How does that compare to previous years?
Um, so in the past year from December, 2025, um,
it's a 9% increase from 2024.
Um, and so, um, I quickly just looked up
what it was this month, um, for the purpose to, to share
with you all today, just to be able to highlight the need.
Um, but we're still 50% higher than pre COVID years.
Um, so we we're still, we, we, we did start,
our numbers started come down and it explains it
and sort of stated the nation, um, the numbers in regards
to food, but we are only one
of the food providers in the country.
You know, there, there's a, there's a whole mode, um, of, of
RA and social service agencies
and churches that are, that are in this space.
And so, yeah, so we're seeing the,
we've seen the need increase in the past year
and that's often reflected, um, in you, you know,
we also run financial mentoring services, um, in, um,
in now supportive housing.
So we, we are see, we're sort, sort of seeing that, um,
the increase in living costs right across the board,
but particularly sharper on that food end.
Um, so that, that's, that's 9% increase from previous year,
but 50% higher than pre COVID.
Thank you.
Okay. I think we'll leave it at
the, leave it at that members.
Thank you. Thank you so much.
Um, to, uh, to Paul and Nana from the Salvation Army.
Thank you. Thank, thank you. Okay. Thank you.
Right, Mr. Clark, have we got adult
and community education out here?
Aurora queued up? Yes, we do.
Very good. I can see Hannah there
and Bronwyn Yates. Okay.
Kiara. Kiara, um, we're in your hands.
You've got 10 minutes. We look forward to your, um,
oral submission on the budget policy statement.
Thank you very much, Koto.
Thank you for the opportunity to present to the Finance
and Expenditure committee today.
I am Han p Baral, chief Executive Officer of Ace roa.
With me is Bronwyn Yates, independent chairperson
of our ACE Strategic Steering Group, A SSG,
which brings together the major national ACE providers,
including community learning associations through schools,
literacy, roa, English Language Partners,
New Zealand Federation of Workers Educational Associations,
rural Education Activities Program REAP UA de incent
for Pacific Languages.
ACE UA is the peak body for the adult
and community education sector,
and represents over a hundred ACE providers who work
with over 80,000 tertiary learners every year.
Adult and community education in Theo has a,
has a history stretching back to the 18 hundreds,
and that's over 180 years of learning in communities.
Many may not have heard of adult and community education
or don't understand sort of
what it really means despite its critical role in the
tertiary education system.
It is the sector of the system with the history going back
to the 18 hundreds of engaging with New Zealanders
who are socially and economically marginalized
and are likely to experience intergenerational needs
that inhibit success in education and employment.
ACE programs are affordable
and designed in response to local community needs
program start where learners are at developing foundation
skills and capabilities that forge their pathways to achieve
and further their education success
and gain employment or promotion.
The sector promotes a culture of lifelong learning
and tailors its programs to ensure accessibility
and appropriateness to meet the diverse
needs of New Zealanders.
ACE programs are designed to meet people's needs
where they're at developing their literacy, numeracy,
digital skills, English language support,
work preparedness, and more.
These are building blocks of four, greater
participation in economic and social life.
The A sector endorses the new tertiary education strategy
2025 to 2030.
We see in it at clear signal
that foundation education is central, not peripheral
to New Zealand's economic future.
We seek the opportunity to ensure the contributions
that the aid sector can provide are recognized.
The numbers make the case according to the OECD survey
of adult skills 2023,
the most recent P-I-A-A-C data in which New Zealand
participated for the second time, 26% of New Zealand adults,
over 1 million people are at level one
or below in nu below in literacy.
That means limited ability to find
and understand basic information,
and 28% are at level one or below.
In numeracy, ACE connects with people in the communities
to make learning pathways, um, successful and tangible.
Everyone knows that foundation education is essential
and critical to achieving the levels of productivity
and economic lift needed to empower New Zealand
and New Zealanders to thrive in a fast changing
and competitive world.
What we're asking the government to consider, uh,
we've got about seven points adult, let just say numeracy.
With over a million adults at level one,
the funding response must match the scale.
ACE providers are already doing this work.
They need the resourcing to do it for the numbers
of New Zealands, new Zealanders,
whose needs deserve to be met.
It's not easy. People need to get support
and start developing their capabilities through a range
of prompts to seek support
and people want better lives for their children.
And with promotion and information, they can see
how their learning has sustainable
and intergenerational impact.
Number two, workforce growth.
Our workforce is diversifying, diversifying rapidly
trics and Stats New Zealand project,
the European population will grow at just about 6% per year
to 2033, compared to 1.8% for Maori, 1.9% for Pacific,
and three, 3% for Asians.
Um, b RLS analysis of stats, New Zealand projection shows
that by 2043, over a quarter
of New Zealand's population will be 20% total,
1% Maori Asian, and 11% Pacific.
These are workers. The pipeline to a skilled workforce, um,
starts with foundation education
and as is where it begins for many communities.
Number three, supporting underserved communities,
underserved communities,
and individuals with low prior attainment,
including school leavers with complex needs
to realize their aspirations.
Number four, national outcomes for equity groups.
We need national outcomes to set clear expectations
and measure success for learners historically disengaged
from education and employment.
Without visibility in the data,
these learnings remain invisible in policy settings.
Number five, a tertiary education
system response for equity.
A deliberate system level response is needed
to support the aspirations
of Maori Pacific peoples disabled people,
and those from low income backgrounds,
including COVID disrupted school leavers.
A sits at the entry point of that system
for many of these learners.
Number six, regional economic,
regional economic development, regional development aligned
to the needs of local businesses, industries,
and communities in order
to build economic performance in these areas and, and,
and address persistent social disadvantage.
And finally, local intervention
and facilitation opportunities that enables wide engagement
between education providers, local communities, iwi
and industry to align delivery
with regional labor market and other needs.
Trusted local relationships are the key.
ACE has been quietly creating confident
communities for over a century.
This is investment in what is already working at the scale
that the challenge demands.
And we welcome your questions.
Oh, very good. Okay. Thank you.
We're gonna go to Francisco, uh, Hernandez.
Uh, thank you chair. And, um, just a question,
do you have a dollar figure around, um, how much the, uh,
the seven things you've asked for, uh, is gonna cost?
Um, I've read through the letter,
but I didn't see, um, a specific dollar
figure attached to that.
Have you done any costings? Thank
You. Um, thank you
Francisco.
Um, no, we haven't done any costing on this yet.
Um, we wanted to take the opportunity today to present, um,
the case for ACE and really thinking that, probably aiming
for the 2027 budget that we'd like to Okay, these changes.
Yeah, I think the opportunity to engage
with the ministry this year, um,
and to engage with, um, really advocating
for the sector is one of our capabil priorities this year
around really promoting the value of the sector.
And we have invested, um, some of our funding in ensuring
that we've got some really good data to be able to talk
to these, um, matters that we're presenting to you today
and, and then come up with, um, a workable
and hopefully what will be a workable solution for,
for future budgets.
And can I have a follow up share or have we read? Yeah,
Yeah. Yep. We've got time. Just
one. Yep.
Cool. Thank you. Um, uh,
what's been the general trend for ACE funding?
Uh, I guess across the term?
Hmm. Um, uh, I believe in the last couple
of years there hasn't been any significant change.
Actually. Bronwyn, did you wanna address that
because, uh,
the A SSG meetings might have been the opportunity to sort
of, um, hear about some of the funding changes?
Yeah. Um, I think the reality is,
just like you've said here, funding hasn't changed
over the last few years.
There is, and,
and across the sector recognition that the adult
and community education sector isn't really recognized as
that big a contributor.
And partly that's because we are, we are made up
of about a hundred different providers.
Um, and this year, as Hannah said, it is the year
that we are collecting a number of the data,
providing a clarity about the outcomes in that
and getting ourselves ready to come back in 2027.
But the reason for being here today is to state our position
to say that we are part of the solution we always have been.
Um, and that if, if we are looking forward to 2043,
like Hannah's talking about, a number of the learners
who are sitting there, uh, potential workforce
who are sitting there who need to be ready for 2043,
are the people that we engage with the best,
and we are the most likely for them to come to
because we are in the communities,
because we have that close reach into their whanau and, and
because they see us as part of them
and they trust us to take them to
that first step of engagement.
Thank you. Okay. I think we'll leave it at that.
Thank you. Um, uh, Hannah
and thank you Bronwyn for, um, presenting, uh, on behalf
of adult and community education today.
Thank you. Appreciate it. Thank you.
Okay, Mr. Clark, are we, uh, how are we going with, um, uh,
CCS disability action?
Phoebe Eden Mann.
Hello, I'm here. Ah, Phoebe, there you're, yes. Sorry,
My head in my, uh, so I'm Phoebe Eden Mann.
I'm the National Policy Analyst for CCS Disability Action.
Um, thank you for the opportunity to present today.
We are quite concerned about the priority areas as well
as some of the short term goals
that have been laid out in the budget policy statement.
It is alarming that given that disabled people make up
around 24% of the population,
that disability is completely absent from their
wellbeing goals and objectives.
So we know that disabled people are proportionately affected
by poverty and experienced poor long-term health outcomes.
With our aging population,
our disability rates are only going to increase, so we need
to future proof our system and we need to do it now.
As a quick note on disability data in the Washington Group,
short set is the data set that's used
to gather disability data.
The issue with that is that it has a really high threshold
for what's considered disabled
and is particularly poor at
covering neurodiversity chronic illnesses
and mental health related disabilities.
What that means in reality is that
most disability disability funding is population based.
So by using the Washington Group short set,
we're actually undercounting the number of disabled people.
So any per capita funding is inherently underfunded compared
to real world demand.
So any, basically any funding increase, it's kind
of more capturing
or filling in a gap rather than actually in
meeting the actual demand that we have.
So one in five disabled adults in the 2023 New Zealand
Health Survey reported that they were unable to afford
to see a GP when they needed to.
This can be catastrophic for, for people as missing.
A GP visit can mean failing
to catch health problems when they're
easier and cheaper to manage.
And disabled people are significantly overrepresented in
most measures of financial hardship,
and there are significant health disparities
between disabled people and non-disabled people.
The sanctions that have been introduced, uh,
will result in people being unable to buy food, pay
for housing, afford medical treatment,
and other basic necessities in the midst of a cost
of living crisis, health and poverty are interlinked,
and the sanctions are at odds with the sec,
with the second wellbeing objective
that's outlined in the budget policy statement,
you simply can't improve health outcomes while imposing
sanctions on vulnerable people,
which disabled people inherently are disabled,
people are more likely to be unemployed.
And for those who can work, many find it difficult
to find work due to, due to the systemic barriers
that disabled people face.
Barriers like a lack of formal education, uh, lack
of suitable and accessible jobs
to employer attitudes being unwilling
to employ disabled people
for disabled people who are able to work.
It's typically not an unwillingness to work, but,
but the systemic barriers
and the complex nature of disability that are the issue,
employers need to be supported to be accommodating,
flexible, and to work with a disability community
to address the systemic barriers to employment.
For the disabled people who are unable to work for the due
to their disability, many should be on the supported living
payment, but are not.
The process to accessing SLP is a really long
and difficult one, and so many people end up stuck on jobs,
job seekers with medical exemptions
where they could be facing sanctions.
The sanctions and the benefit reforms fail
to address the significant barriers to accessing SLP,
which is really concerning
for the disability community as a whole.
Disabled people are disproportionately affected by poverty,
and again, the wellbeing objective cannot be met if we don't
urgently address the systemic reasons
for disabled people living in poverty in the first place.
The sanctions that have been introduced are overly punitive
and harsh with little evidence that they're effective.
There is how evidence,
however, evidence that sanctions are often imposed, not
because of intentional non-compliance, but
because of administrative areas
or a lack of clear communication
and understanding of obligation.
MEC is simply not accessible for many people.
And navigating the system can be really tricky,
that we are concerned that with this in mind,
that disabled people are being negatively impacted
by the sanctions when they shouldn't be.
There are some actions that the government could take
that would drastically and quickly
improve the poverty rates.
For disabled people, the disability allowance
and child disability allowance rates must be increased.
We are alarmed to see that the disability allowance was
included in the sanctions, uh,
for people receiving the youth payment
or the young parent payment
and have the benefits cut,
including the disability allowance in the,
in those sanctions is frankly cruel and unnecessary.
It's not a main benefit.
It's a weekly payment to help with the additional
and unavoidable costs of being disabled.
We already do have a relatively low allowance rate compared
to other places like the uk,
but it's still vital support for disabled people.
The UK also has lower risks of income, poverty
and poor outcomes for disabled people
and their families than, and a key reason for
that is their higher disability allowances.
Instead of including it in the sanctions,
we are strongly urging the government
to prioritize an urgent
and significant increase to the both
of the disability allowances, as that will have a direct
and measurable impact on the lives of disabled people.
Um, you, for the opportunity to present on,
on the budget policy statement, we are very concerned about
what the government's proposing
and the impact that this will have on
disabled people in their whanau.
It's imperative that disability funding not
be cut, but increased.
And we firmly believe that the government cannot meet the
objectives of improving health achievements, uh,
improving health outcomes without significant
and improved targeted funding in these areas.
Mm-hmm. Benefit sanctions will cause direct
to measurable harm to disabled people and their families.
And we implore the government to rethink their approach
to this and to remove the traffic light sanctions.
Disabled people have historically fallen down the gaps in
the system, and we urge the government
not to let it happen again.
And I'm happy to take questions if there is any.
Okay. Uh, thank you Phoebe. I've got a question.
Um, what was your take on, uh, the honorable Louise Upton's,
um, announcement to improve, um,
disability support services, including, uh, uh, changes, uh,
to, to get back to flexible funding, uh,
from April this year,
and including in budget 25
1 billion in new funding over four years
for disability support services.
So extra funding from that budget for that, for that
and, um, and flexible funding.
Just wanna get your take on those. So it's
Announcements. So the
flexible funding going, the flexible funding was kind
of caught up in the review from last year,
and so that was good, you know, that there was a lot
of pushback, uh,
understandably from the disability
community about that whole thing.
Um, and we are pleased that that's, you know,
slowly starting to get back on track.
Yeah. The problem with the 1 billion over four years is it
goes back to the Washington group short set data.
So yes, it's 1 billion over four years.
That's still not enough to meet the real world demand of
what it, it, like, it's, it's just, it's not
because we are undercounting disabled people.
So for ex, as a personal example,
I have multiple autoimmune conditions.
I have arthritis, I use a cane my whole life.
I've been a disabled person under the
Washington Group short set.
I'm not considered disabled.
So if I needed to re to access this funding,
I could probably access it,
but I would be putting more, more of a drain on it
because the funding's just not there
because it's based on, it's based on undercounted numbers.
So until we really address the, the problem of
that we've got of undercounting things
and undercounting the population,
these problems are gonna continue.
Okay. Okay. Any other, any other,
uh, comments or questions?
Members? Okay. Thank you.
Phoebe Eden, man, thank you
for your ongoing advocacy for the sector.
Thank you. Okay. Thank you. Okay.
That brings us to Good Shepherd New Zealand.
Have we got Brittany Goodwin, Mr. Clark,
Just bring her in now.
Uh, we also welcome, uh, Mike Butrick MP
for wire wrap too.
Good to see you, Mike.
Okay. Brittany's just coming through.
We've got Brittany and just needs to turn,
uh, camera on. Oh,
Yeah. Okay.
Let there be light. We need some divine intervention.
Here we go. Okay.
Brittany, can you turn your camera on?
It looks like you're there. We just
can't, can you hear us?
Um, we just can't see
or hear you otherwise.
Um, our next submitter, Mr.
Chair, we can always come back to Brittany.
Uh, yeah, we can do that if you like.
We've got David and Gail here.
Okay. Let's get them on. Okay.
So this is Kaki, um, Dr. David Geller and Dr.
Gail Duncan.
I
We're here. Thank you.
Oh, well, thank you for being, uh, ahead of time, uh,
to David and Gail.
Uh, we know you are very familiar,
particularly Gail, uh, with this process.
And so, uh, let's maximize this time.
Thanks for being early, and
we'll look forward to your presentation.
Thank you. Uh, Cameron. Um, my name is David Gaer.
Thanks for the opportunity to present to the Finance
and Expenditure Committee today.
Um, I'm the spokesperson for Kaki Ho
and this afternoon I wanna speak briefly
to the economic imperative
to invest in health and healthcare.
Uh, Kaki Ho is a recently formed coalition working
to protect and strengthen Tiao New Zealand's public health
system by uniting communities, health workers, iwi,
Maori partnership boards, unions, and advocacy groups.
As guardians for public health, we campaigned
for a well-resourced te honoring publicly
provided health system that delivers equitable,
culturally safe care for all.
Right now we're a long way from that
and sliding backwards in large part due
to inadequate funding over the years.
A failure togi our failure
to invest in necessary infrastructure and workforce.
And because of the ongoing privatization of services,
all this set in the context of a persistent unwillingness
to address the escalating social
and commercial drivers of demand.
In her recent paper Managed Decline,
the Health Economist Andrea Black projects
that under the current settings, by 2035,
only 6.6% of adults in New Zealand
will meet the WHO definition of being in good health.
That's 6.6% of adults in New Zealand by 2035
being in good health.
Surely that's not the future.
We want members of the Finance and Expenditure Committee.
Um, I would expect that you of all people must know
that the economic success
of our nation is dependent on the health of our people.
And it is our view that privatization will not fix New
Zealand's health, pro health health in the, in the main.
So we are looking to budget 26 to address the commercial
and social determinants of health fund,
our public health system
to deliver the services New Zealanders need across primary
and community care, mental health
and hospital-based services
to include a dedicated funding package
for Iwi Maori partnership boards
and long-term funding certainty to invest in public,
the public workforce recruitment and development,
and fully fund pay equity settlements for nursing,
midwifery, and allied health,
and boldly fund new health infrastructure developments
to upgrade and replace hospitals,
including regional facilities to Tata.
Our Human Rights Commission states that the right
to health encompasses not just the absence of disease
or infirmity, but complete physical, mental,
and social wellbeing.
It includes access to both timely
and appropriate healthcare, as well as the underlying social
and economic determinants of health, such as conditions
of work and adequate food and shelter.
It's clear to us that our approach to the funding
of health services is inadequate
and limited by a siloed short-term cost containment mindset
and a lack of appropriate long-term planning.
Put simply, New Zealand cannot afford to have so many
of its people in poor health.
And we say it as an economic imperative for us as a nation
to invest in health and healthcare services for all
that is only possible through public provision
and cannot be done through privatization
of services for profit.
The link between investing in public health provision
to achieve universal coverage
and economic growth is well proven.
Kaki order echoes the call from the head of Treasury
and the Infrastructure Commission, that there is a case
that the government should increase crown debt
to fund long-term infrastructure.
They have recommended a doubling
of the spend on hospital construction as a proportion
of GDP over the next 20 years to factor
and growth in the economy, which will also account
for population growth in any increases in productivity.
Kaki is pleased with this development,
but wishes to point out that New Zealand's approach
to kick the can down the road
and not invest in the future
is not unique to infrastructure.
It applies
warning earlier this month over the state
of New Zealand's hospitals, emphasizing the scale
of the rebuild is a wake up call we must
need in the next budget.
And those that follow kaki is calling
for much more than a normal increase in health investment
to account for the same factors.
Investment in health is essential for economic growth
and must be prioritized in the 2026 budget policy statement
reflecting the 2026 national infrastructure plan priorities.
Thank you, Mr. Brewer.
Thanks for, um, allowing us
to make that presentation to you.
Oh, good. Uh, Gail, have you got anything to add?
No, we're just waiting on questions.
Um, I I could add something brief, but we, we would rather,
Okay. Let's go. No, that's
all right. Then.
Let's go to Dr. Russell.
Um, thank you for that. You spoke about the social
and commercial determinants of public health,
social determinants.
I get, but commercial determinants is not a phrase I've
heard 'cause I'm not a public health specialist.
Could you just elaborate on what that is? Sure.
Um, the, the commercial determinants are,
are largely those ones.
Um, uh, I'll, I'll give you three.
Um, uh, tobacco, alcohol, and unhealthy foods.
Um, those three alone account for a third of the, um,
health loss in New Zealand every year.
Um, so they are very substantial issues
and in a way, um, I sometimes look at this
as though sometimes we're, we, we, we, we,
we fund firefighters, which are our healthcare workers,
whilst at the same time we enable arsonists.
And it seems a bit mad, you know, so we, it's,
there's no coherence there.
There's no, there's no public health system
that can ever afford to keep up with unchecked demand.
So we need to look at the two of them together.
Right. So tobacco, alcohol, and, um, unhealthy,
Unhealthy foods. Yes.
Yeah. Okay. Thank you. That's helpful.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you. Um, David
and Gail, you, you might have seen that the, and,
and, uh, the Minister of Finance during
that presentation on the budget policy statement at the end,
uh, to FEC at the end of January,
that she pretty much announced that of the $2.4 billion, uh,
operating allowance, the new money for budget, um, 2026,
that 1.4 billion IE most of it, uh,
would be going into vote health.
Uh, is that encouraging?
Gail, do you wanna tackle that? Yes.
Um, yes, I was, um, present at that meeting.
And the problem I think that we are trying to emphasize is
that although that money, um, will sustain, um,
current, the current expenditure, um,
necessary, it doesn't allow for improvements.
It just keeps up with the current, um,
and not even perhaps that
with the current population dynamics and, um, and needs
and is constrained within a, um, a,
uh, within a, a prescription for, um, containment
of expenditure with the name
of which has just slipped my head for the moment.
And, um, we're very concerned that, um,
what is needed is a major push to make up
for the UN investment in health over very mean over a long
period of time, which Ian Rooney brought to our attention,
um, and we already knew,
but has, has said that this is the moment for the government
to take a major move towards investing in infrastructure
and services for our public
provided health, um, across New Zealand, not private.
Okay. I think we'll leave it at that. Thank you.
Loud and clear. Thank you, David.
Thank you Gail, for your ongoing camera.
Okay. Alright, thank you. Thanks so much. Bye-bye.
Okay, thank you. Now that brings us, uh, back to, um,
Brittany Goodwin from Good Shepherd New Zealand.
Uh, yeah, I think she's online now.
Oh, there we are. Uh, thank you Brittany.
Thank you for your patience.
It looks like you are live
and clear now, so, uh, we've,
we've got you for 10 minutes. Thank you.
Fantastic. Thank you Mr.
Speaker, and thank you for your patience.
Uh, uh, my name is Brittany Goodwin.
I'm the policy and advocacy lead
for Good Shepherd of New Zealand.
We are a charitable NGO present in over 70 countries
worldwide in New Zealand.
We're particularly focused on two
of the biggest issues facing women
and girls in New Zealand, so poverty and family violence
and the challenges that stem from these.
So one way we do this is
by providing alternative lending options at one cost
through no interest, no fee loans for essential items,
services and debt consolidation.
We also work with people
who have experienced family violence, economic abuse
to remove unjust or coerced debt
and help people access entitlements.
So I'm here before you today
because those of us who are working at the front lines are
seeing firsthand that budget 2025 in many ways has not
delivered outcomes for those most in need.
And we think that budget 2026
should not repeat these mistakes.
So, as we all know,
budget 2025 focused strongly on curbing government
spending and reducing the deficit.
These savings were achieved,
however, through cuts to initiatives
that directly impact New Zealanders already facing
disadvantage, particularly through changes
to the pay equity scheme
and various changes in tightening
of job seeker requirements and benefits.
Should budget 2026 seek further reprioritization
of funding from initiatives
that support socioeconomic outcomes, we are concerned
that this will cause significant and ongoing harm.
So while we know that the complex global economic
environment has impacted New Zealand families in many ways
from 2025 and into 2026, the job market is especially tight.
I'm sure we've all seen in the last week
or so, the new story reporting a job listing
with over 2,500 applications for one job.
What those of us, um, who are in work are finding is,
comes a low low, especially compared to overseas salaries.
And at the same time, the cost
of living is increasing rapidly,
particularly in food and utilities.
What this means is it's getting even harder for people
to pay for essentials, let alone save for emergencies.
People might be just getting by
and then the car needs repairs
or a tooth gets infected, as I mentioned earlier.
Um, we operate services to support some
of those in financial need.
At the moment, we are receiving between 1300
and 1500 inquiries a month from people seeking out support.
Many of these people we're up to able to help, thankfully,
uh, but many we can't
because the loan would be deemed unaffordable.
So the client simply doesn't receive enough income
to service the loan in a way
that we think wouldn't cause them further harm.
You can't budget what you don't have.
Our written submission provides some more data
and narrative from our services
that show the significant challenges facing low income
households, particularly in the
housing and employment space.
I won't go over that information again,
but what I would like to do is share a true story
of a client we've worked with to show the real
and immediate needs facing people.
At the moment, I'll call our client Josephine.
One day Josephine's teenage niece turned up on her doorstep
following incidents of
of family violence in the extended family.
Her niece had nowhere else to go
and she needed a safe place to stay.
Josephine knew firsthand what that felt like
so she didn't hesitate even though the house was already
full and the budget thin.
She welcomed her niece in Josephine's, a solo mom
to two kids already struggling to pay the power bills,
lunches, petrol, and other unexpected costs that pop up.
There were no spare beds and no spare rooms.
So her niece ended up sleeping on the couch
and some nights Josephine's own kids swapped places
so their cousin could have a proper sleep in a real bed.
Everyone was adjusting making it work,
but Josephine could see
that her niece seated some real space to heal
and breathe without feeling like a burden.
She tried finding support to help cover the cost of the bed,
but she was told she didn't qualify.
We think a bed shouldn't feel like an impossible expense.
So that's when she came to us.
We could see that the health
and wellbeing of a teenager in a really
vulnerable situation was at stake.
So we were able to approve a $300 emergency grant for her
so she could buy a bed.
And now her niece has one small place of, uh, of peace
where she can sleep and rest
and think the house feels calmer.
I would encourage you all to think about
what $300 means to you in your life.
Maybe it paid for the clothes
or the shoes you're currently wearing.
A nice dinner out with your family, a week's groceries.
For some, for Josephine
and her family, it meant a teenage girl escaping violence
did not have to sleep on a couch.
It meant dignity and a chance for her to heal.
So what does this mean for budget 2026
that is very common in terms of recession
to see a return to austerity.
We see this across history across the jurisdictions.
What is concerning is the collective impact
of these changes on those at the margins.
Those who already face multiple vulnerabilities
and who struggle to get by day
to day like Josephine and her niece.
Those with low incomes have less ability
to save their future, less financial resilience
to weather life shocks when they arise,
and they face more uncertainty in older age.
Not only is poverty
and old ages serious failing of our system,
but is it it is expensive, particularly in the context
of a rapidly aging population.
Non-government social service providers have always
and continue to fill a much needed gap in response
to these societal challenges.
It cuts. The funding over the last few years have put
increased pressure on the services that remain.
So, for example, in 20 24, 1 third
of budgeting services across New Zealand were informed
that they would no longer receive funding despite high
increased demand without funding.
The people who need these services
simply fall through the cracks.
The budget policy statement 2026 notes
that addressing New Zealand's longer term
productivity challenges.
It's a key focus for budget 2026,
yet increasing productivity requires addressing poverty,
including intergenerational inequality.
Workers who experience financial stress
and its associated mental health impacts find
it harder to focus at work.
Small businesses cannot start and expand
and thrive without access to capital
through savings or approval for loans.
Beneficiaries trapped in a cycle
of dependents will not be able
to enter the job market if they cannot afford
a car to get to work.
And those who cannot afford basic essential
expenses can fall into problem debt
or be forced to withdraw their can.
We saver hardship balances due to hardship
of which there have been a record number in recent months,
which puts greater pressure on social
and government services
as people enter old age without any savings.
We believe that pulling back from social outcomes to follow,
to focus on poor public services
and reduce spending risks, false economies such
as under utilization or health crises, all
of which are costly, these choices
sacrifice long-term positive outcomes for the sake
of short-term savings.
Austerity in times
that economic stress may provide immediate debt relief,
but it comes at a cost both in the the present
and for future generations.
Even economists remain unconvinced
of the long-term economic effectiveness
of cutting government based lines.
We agree that financial
and fiscal sustainability is essential for our wellbeing
as a nation, but a balanced approach must be taken to ensure
that people do not continue to be left behind.
I think the committee for their time
and welcoming future engagement from members.
Okay. Thank you. Um,
Brittany, I'm gonna go to Dr. Russell.
Um, thank you for that.
Um, one of the dynamics I know that exists, um,
with family violence is of women staying in, um,
toxic relationships
'cause they can't afford to go elsewhere.
Have you seen any of that
or is that an issue that you work with as well?
Absolutely. So we deal, we tend to deal
with the financial side of economic of abuse.
So we call that economic abuse.
We actually have recently released a report showing
that it costs an estimated $10,000
to leave a violent relationship,
which I'm sure you can imagine many people in
that situation do not have really access to that amount
of money and they have to stay.
And that occurs at all socioeconomic
standings throughout our country,
and it happens a lot more frequently than we think.
15% of ever partnered women in New Zealand will experience
some form of economic abuse in a
intimate partner relationship, which is one seven.
Wow. Thank you. Okay. Any, anything else? Members?
Okay. Thank you. Uh, Brittany, uh, the
Josephine's anecdotal name was not lost on us
given, uh, the Good Shepherd.
So, um, thank you for all the advocacy work
that you do. Thank
You.
Okay, Mr. Mr. Clark, how are we going?
Have we got, uh, medicines New Zealand,
Dr. Graham Jarvis ce?
You have Indeed. Oh, very good.
You are well familiar with this, uh, process.
Uh, Dr. Jarvis, thank you
for your submission on behalf of Medicines nz.
We're in your hands. You've got 10 minutes.
Okay. Um, thank you very much. Um, Mr. Chair.
Um, look, as has been with other budget policy statements,
um, from this government
and previous governments medicines,
new Zealand's generally highly supportive
of the proposed goals and priorities around health.
Um, there's a clear focus on the current one, obviously
to have a more productive economy
and deliver it, uh,
efficiencies in the public health system.
But one thing that we would like to draw out is
that we do contend that modern medicines are one such lever
that needs to be considered in achieving this.
I've heard some of the previous submitters, uh, online, uh,
and, and well aware of the constraints
that the health system actually has.
Uh, yet there is plenty of evidence as was
provided in the written, uh, submission by us as
to the benefits of an investment within medicines in terms
of not only helping with health system productivity
beyond the benefits to the patient's health
and Hanau health, uh, and a healthy community as well,
but also in terms of productivity for the economy
of a country, uh,
and the broader wellbeing of the population as a whole.
Uh, those gains we feel have been somewhat underdone
by the two issues that we raised.
Despite recent efforts by multiple governments
to uplift the funding.
New Zealand still remains what we refer to
as an OECD laggard.
Um, and also the issues
that we have seen clearly in the 30 year or
or so of underinvestment in Farm XCPB, uh,
which has basically seen it flatline
or in terms of the community component, uh,
being negative in real terms, uh, over the past two decades,
uh, compared to other parts of the, uh, investment
for health over the years, this is a concern for us, um,
and has been for a number of years.
Uh, it, it's good
to see the government attempting to address it.
Our view is that at the moment for the health workforce,
which does have some issues,
we are engaging quite extensively with it
and are hearing the issues over a half empty toolbox
for them to do their jobs efficiently.
We realize health workforce is an issue in terms
of not only, uh, retention,
but also, uh, drawing in those from overseas.
And we feel for those that are actually in the coun country,
giving them a toolbox
that they can actually do an optimal job on is quite
important, and that includes medicines
and other medical technologies in general.
Um, while the uplift in funding has been well received in
the past, we do note
that the budget policy statement 2025 made very clear
explicit reference to medicine's uplift.
We've not seen that in the budget policy statement for 2026,
although there was mention obviously quite strongly
of health being a particular focus area, and that's positive
and reassuring to see.
So from our perspective, uh, the concerns
that we raise are the same.
The productivity benefits
of medicines are very well established, um,
both from New Zealand case studies as well as from overseas.
Their role as an essential tool within a highly efficient,
uh, health system are well established as well,
both in New Zealand and particularly overseas.
Our concerns remain though that if we continue
to have these poor historic long-term trends, uh,
that we will see an inability for our health system
to be optimal into the future, irrespective
of whether you want people in a primary setting
or in a secondary setting.
And I would contend that the majority of medicine's main,
uh, benefits come in a community
or population setting rather than in a tertiary
or secondary hospital setting.
And if we are trying to drive a health system towards doing
more in primary in community, uh, a, a role
for medicines becomes quite important.
With that in mind, we had two solutions
or recommendations that we made,
and that the government in particular, uh,
note the impacts delivered by attaining
the right overall mix of health system inputs,
including an uplift in modern medicines, uh,
use into the health services.
This will really have an aiding effect in terms
of the delivery of the budget policy goals,
including improved health outcomes, enhanced economic
cultural wellbeing and productivity
for the New Zealand population.
The second recommendation was
that there is new funding initiative
for the national pharmaceutical procurement
appropriation within budget 2026 for addition
to PX combined pharmaceutical budget.
Again, this is to enhance the medicine's investment levels,
which the current government has started well
as has a previous government,
but there seems to be a flat lining effect now, uh,
with no new appropriation beyond, uh, budget.
2026 is currently forecast.
So in addition now would be quite important,
this will aid in the trajectory towards our OECD peers.
As the report showed in the attachment,
which is a very long document, uh, also would show
New Zealand sits at about 4.9% of its, um, medicines
and disability investment.
And the OECD average is 13.3.
I will allay the, the committee if it's going to come back
with the statement around that's
because we negotiate better than everyone else in the OECD.
Plenty of other countries would say the same thing.
Plenty of other countries have a centralized procurement
agency that gets its medicines.
It's about, as we indicated in our first recommendation,
getting the overall mix right so
that you're actually getting an optimal productive
healthcare system for the public at large.
So I'll leave it there, but I'm willing
to take any questions from the committee.
Thank you.
Sorry. Mute. Uh, thank you Dr. JOAs.
I'm gonna go to Todd Stevenson for a act.
Thank you, uh, Graham, for your presentation
and outlining, uh, what your industry looking for.
We've obviously heard, we've heard a few submissions today,
obviously, uh, in relation to health, which is great.
Um, some people asking for more money, et cetera.
You, you mentioned that you think medical technologies can
deliver greater efficient efficiency and pro productivity.
Mm-hmm. I'm just curious to, yeah,
if you could give us some examples,
because I think I mentioned this earlier,
health New Zealand at the moment, it's got an annual budget
of $32 billion, that's $32 billion.
Uh, if a fraction of that was given to medical technologies,
do you think it could increase base,
basically the efficiency
and productivity of our health system in some way?
Yeah, there are a number of standard of care products, uh,
in early stage cancer
where they're oral rather than infusions.
And so if they're able to be delivered in an oral format,
that takes, you know, that frees up space for infusions
of other things, uh, such, uh, uh, beyond.
So for some of the Im, uh, immunological diseases
that new is, uh, confront in a public health setting
and may also allow that patient
to be moved into a primary care setting.
I mean, there's the, well talked about Tri Kafta example
for, for cystic fibrosis, where you're now not having
to do operations on people in terms
of double heart lung transplants.
Uh, and people are able to lead very productive
and active lives, not see their neurologist as often
as they need to in terms of outpatient visits.
Um, you know, there are from, there are plenty of cases
where medicines help move people into a primary setting.
Uh, they avoid things like kidney dialysis
for diabetes, for example.
I, you are looking at kidney dialysis per patient being over
a hundred thousand dollars per annum.
I can tell you that that's not the cost
of the medicine per annum.
So they are actually cost saving, they're beneficial
and they're a valuable investment to be making.
Um, so there's a plethora of, of cases
that I could bore the committee with.
Uh, there is certainly plenty
of evidence both in New Zealand
and overseas of the benefits these products can do in terms
of moving people into a primary setting
or avoiding hospitals in the first place.
Okay, I think we'll leave it at that.
Dr. Jarvis, thank you, uh, on behalf of
representing Medicines nz
and thank you for your submission both written on today.
All the best. Thank you for your time,
Everyone. You
Thank you. Okay, Mr. Chair.
Yes. We don't have, uh, the taxpayers union here,
but we do have peace movement out if you want to go to them.
Okay. Be oh, yes, because we're tracking.
Oh, no, we're bang on time. Uh, okay.
Let's go to, let's go to Peace Movement ra then.
Okay. Do we have the Peace Movement? Ra?
Do we have, um, who have we got there?
Ed Wier Hughes coordinator. Ed Wier.
Ah, yes. Good. Kiata. Can,
Can you hear me okay?
Yep, I can hear you. And we can see you.
So, oh, we're in your hands.
Thanks for being, uh, 10 minutes, uh, uh, early
because we've been able to fill this hole, so thank you.
Thanks. I'll launch into it then.
Thank you for this opportunity to speak with you.
S support all of the submitters
who have proposed more funding be allocated
for social justice before then, no doubt after us as well.
Our submission, which we have, is focused on an area
where substative amount
of unnecessary spending can be reduced in order
to release funding for socially, for purposes,
namely military spending.
While we support the long-term wellbeing objectives
in the policy statement,
we remain deeply concerned at New Zealand's,
comparatively high level of military spending
and the negative impact this has on achieving the long term
social, economic, environmental,
and cultural wellbeing of New Zealanders.
Our submission groups, the negative consequences
of military spending into three main areas, social
and economic justice, environmental
and climate justice, environmental,
and the best interest of children,
which I'll return to in a minute.
And we propose a better way forward to meet the budget.
Budget objectives.
More than $9 billion was spent on the armed forces last
year, and more than $5.7 billion was allocated
for military spending and budget.
2025 on average,
that's more than $111 million every week.
Priori prioritizing such an amount
for combat Ready Armed forces is profoundly disturbing when
there are so many major issues facing this country.
The levels of poverty
and social inequality, lack of affordable housing,
the overburdened health system, inadequate preparations
for climate change, as we've seen
yet again in the past couple of weeks.
And more military spending impacts negatively on all
of these by diverting resources that could be put use.
Secondly, in our submission, we raise issues
around the obligation on state parties
to the convention on the rights
of the child when weighing up competing budget allocation
and spending priorities to,
and I quote, be able to just demonstrate
how the best interests
of the child have been considered in budgetary decision,
including how they have been weighed against
other considerations.
The Committee on the Rights
of the child has expressed deep concern about the lack
of sufficient resourcing to eradicate child poverty
and to address inequalities In its concluding observations
on New Zealand for more than a decade, it's inconceivable
to independent human rights experts,
how comparatively wealthy country such as New Zealand
has such an appalling number of children
and their families who do not have access
to an adequate standard of living.
The committee's latest concluding observations, again,
emphasize the need for the New Zealand government to assess
how all areas of public spending may serve the
best interest of the child.
This has not been done for any budget, but, or perhaps
because a child impact assessment would clearly show
that military spending does not advance the best interest
of children in any way, but instead acts against them.
The focus of the 2026
and future budgets must have a genuine,
must be a genuine focus on wellbeing for all
and prioritize ensuring every child in al has access
to everything they need to flourish instead
of simply stumbling on with outdated policies
that unacceptable social
consequences for many New Zealanders.
Given New Zealand's comparatively limited resources,
desperate need for substantially increased social funding
domestically, as well as the urgent need
for climate justice here and in the Pacific.
It simply makes no sense to continue the following fully
of spending billions on combat equipment
and activities when there are
so many other more pressing needs.
We therefore urge you to include our three recommendations
in your report for the House.
They're firstly that all funding allocated
for combat purpose, purpose, that all funding allocated
for combat purpose purchases
and upgrades be put on hold pending a comprehensive review
of New Zealand's wider human security needs
as outlined in our submission.
Secondly, that the allocation
for military spending be decreased in the
2026 and future budgets.
And thirdly, that a thorough child rights impact, sorry,
child impact assessment is conducted on all military
spending included in this and in future budgets.
Thank you.
Okay. Very good. Very good. Thank you.
Have we got any questions, uh, for peace movement, uh, roa,
Edwina cues, any comments, members?
Just I think an overall vote of thanks, Edwina,
for your ongoing advocacy.
Cool. Thank you. And we'll see you again. Thank you.
All the best for the rest of the day. Okay.
Now that takes us back to, uh, nz uh, taxpayers Union.
Have we got them online? I can see Jordan Williams there.
Yes, we are here. Uh,
Yes. Okay. Uh,
good afternoon, gentlemen.
We've got your, um, we've got your submission on letterhead
and, uh, we look forward to your presentation.
Uh, thank you very much. Uh, good afternoon to, um,
the committee, members of the committee.
Um, I'm Ray Deacon.
I'm the, uh, resident economist, uh, with the union.
Um, on my right is, um, James Ross,
our head of, uh, policy and, uh, legislative affairs.
On my left is Austin Ham Banks, um, one
of our research interns,
and we have our executive director, um,
on the line from elsewhere.
Um, I'll, I'll try and keep, um, this, this brief.
Um, it may surprise you,
but, um, we consider
that the budget policy statement 2026 doesn't comply
with the, um, requirements of the Public Finance Act.
It doesn't explain how, um, the budget accords
with the short term intentions set out in the
fiscal strategy report.
This is required by Section 26, M two C
of the Public Finance Act.
The short term fiscal forecast do not align
with the short term intentions.
Uh, either the surplus target date is missed,
the revenue intention is not missed met
because of this, the debt intention is not missed,
not met, but worse.
The net worth intention is not only, um, not met,
but it also worsens due to all the borrowing
that persistent government deficits are requiring.
Um, this is probably why there's been no attempt
at any explanations.
Um, budget policy statement, uh,
2026 clearly demonstrates the government's
continued addiction to spending.
Minister Willis makes much about bending the expenditure
curve down.
She is also keen to promote the 11 billion in savings
that she has made each of the last two years.
But these aren't savings at all
as she's just spent them elsewhere.
In real terms, the money spent on Core Crown operations
continues to rise year after year.
The government operating balance is a structural deficit,
but economic growth alone won't fix this.
Although the budget policy statement acknowledges this,
it states that fiscal consolidation
to correct this will be achieved over time.
But we are not sure that we have the time.
The minister's laissez-faire attitude
to expenditure reduction implies.
We have ministers at Willis',
recent assertions at the New Zealand Economic Forum
concerning a commitment, commitment
to fiscal discipline Ring Hollow.
This morning's announcement,
the government will unnecessarily spend 200 million
for Genesis Energy's capital raising reinforces the view
that this is a pen, a spin thrift government,
and this will all be, uh, made with borrowed money
because the cupboard is bare.
Now, I'll hand over to James
and he'll talk about treasury's concerns,
which are growing louder and, uh, more frequent.
Thank you very much, Ray. Um, the point that we'd like
to make throughout this submission is that, you know,
on the one hand we are firing off the warning calls,
but we're certainly not the only ones.
As Ray Notes, treasury is getting louder and more frequent,
but frequent in its criticisms
of the current fiscal strategy.
Uh, last year in treasuries,
three reports into New Zealand's long-term fiscal health.
Uh, three key issues were raised that we just, we'd like
to hammer home lead has to be the focus
of any ongoing fiscal strategy.
One was the aging population.
Now, uh, in 1970, we had a dependency ratio
of about seven to one.
So 2030, that'll be about four to one.
By 2060, that'll be about two to one.
That's a problem you just can't tax away.
Treasury is also keen to draw attention to the fact
that external shocks are becoming more
frequent and more expensive.
Those shocks have cost around 10%
of GDP each decade since the late 1980s
to manage and bounce back from.
We're in the position now where I think it's, it's credible
to say that we haven't bounced back from the last shock.
Uh, and yet we have burned a lot of our fiscal headroom.
We don't look to be, um, moving in the direction of,
of opening that debt headroom back up again.
And of course, there's the issue that the crown's, uh,
balance sheet continues to get more complex
and more difficult to manage.
As recently as this month, uh,
treasury Secretary Ian Renie made the point that
next parliament's core focus has to be, uh,
fiscal consolidation
and reopening those fiscal buffers in that he
and we are are of one mind now, paraphrasing Mr.
Run himself, uh, I think he put it quite eloquently.
Change has to happen. This current strategy
isn't, uh, sustainable.
The longer we kick the can
down the road, the more it's gonna hurt.
On that note, I'll pass to you, please, John.
Oh, thanks very much, James.
Um, apol, I, I'm outta the country, so apologize.
I, I apologies. I can't be there with you, uh, with you.
Um, 10 days ago, we heard from the Treasury Secretary,
um, uh, the speech at the economics forum.
We are in effect treasury are, um, uh,
firing the fiscal claxon.
Uh, and the taxpayer Union would argue
that the government should be very concerned
that the political claxons are going off as well.
We took a lot of criticism, um, by the minister for our
Ola Fudge campaign at the end of the year.
But there was absolutely no criticism on the facts on
which it was based on.
This government was elected, every party was elected
to reduce government spending.
Government has totally failed and successive budgets.
And, uh, that is a political issue.
The, uh, the spending, no matter how you measure it, uh,
is ahead of where Grant Robinson was.
Uh, there was a very clear mandate given.
And I think that the political risk
for the incumbent government is a situation like
what happened in the uk
where the conservatives had their highest post-war election
result, um, to being absolutely smashed
because the, uh, proposition
to the electorate simply rung hollow.
And I think that is a very real risk
with this government having not got on top, uh, of its, um,
of its costs, uh, frankly, uh, gaslighting
the New Zealand public by claiming that, um,
gross savings are the equivalent of net savings, uh, meaning
repeating over and over again that the government, um, uh,
has saved money or, um, reduced spending when
that is simply being business as usual.
Um, shifting, uh, one line item over, uh, in, in
until another, uh,
and the risk we go into from an economic perspective is we
end up where the UK is, where it is inevitable
that taxes go up
because successive governments have failed to get on top
of the size of government, the burden of the state.
And as a result, we have a very sluggish economy that, um,
despite, uh, all the jawboning the,
the government might want is persistently underperforming.
So with that, we're more than happy to take,
uh, any questions.
Okay. Okay. Thank you gentlemen.
I'm going to go to Dr. Deborah Russell.
Um, thank you for that.
I've just, um, noticed your,
just reading your written submission.
Um, you talk about the ongoing impact
of adverse weather events,
but this has started to not look like just adverse weather
effects, but ongoing effect of climate change
as being a real and sustained impact on our economy
as it is with the rest of the world.
So think, if you think of it as that way,
rather than just being one off adverse weather events, does
that change your analysis?
Um, I can let, um, James
and Ray put together the, the written submission,
but I can probably, um, speak to it.
Uh, it is a drop in the bucket in terms of the size of the,
uh, problem that we face.
The proportion of borrowing that relates to, uh, um,
infrastructure related to climate change is very low.
And I would point, as Ray referred to earlier,
that the decision today for the government
to borrow a couple of hundred million extra
or, um, remove it from the capital allowance to spend, uh,
on Genesis Energy shares.
Um, here is an example of infrastructure for which the, um,
private equity markets are more than happy to provide.
And the real cost to that is either higher debt
or the very infrastructure transport, resilience,
climate resilience infrastructure, the very things we need
that won't be funded
and can't be funded by the private sector.
So I, I, I agree, um, Dr. Russell, um,
that there's certainly an issue there,
but let's not fool ourselves.
Um, this is, we are in this position
because of whereas the rest of the world pulled back
spending after COVID, um, New Zealand, both as a proportion,
the economy had a very high, I think, out into the US
in terms of the COVID response.
But an and unlike the rest of the world hasn't turned
that tap back off.
And despite the mandate, uh, this government appears
to be locking that tap on.
Thank you. Okay.
I'm going to go to Deputy chair Ryan Hamilton.
Oh, thanks Chair. And thanks Jordan, Ray
and James for that submission.
Obviously quite a critical submission,
but appreciating you have
to stay relevant to your membership.
Um, you've commented quite critically on, uh,
our fiscal positions,
but what explicit, um, policy would you change
or shift from a funding perspective?
There's a very good paper, um, by one of our, um, by, um,
one of our colleagues called the Path to Surplus
that the minister, um,
of finance has made quite a, um, mention of.
In fact, she spoke about it at length,
at the half year fiscal update, uh,
across the road at Treasury, uh,
where she held it up and went through it.
And she actually referred a gain to it today in,
in a standup where she said that she, um,
in rejecting a journalist's, uh,
question on the genesis energy matter.
Uh, she said, well, the, I don't wanna respond
to the taxpayer's union because they want to get rid
of working, working for families,
which actually is very unfair.
Maybe she hasn't read the report that she held up,
but as the report, um, presents it, it is an option.
We've presented a number of options to get back to surplus.
And by that we mean real surplus, not a ober gall ex fudge.
Um, and we, in that report note that in 2005, um,
getting rid of working for families was, um,
national party policy.
And when I last looked, um,
working in the policy unit in 2005, um,
was no other than Nicola Willis.
And as an intern in that policy unit,
I do not remember Nicola Willis objecting to that policy.
So I guess a follow on from that then,
what would be the social implications if we were
to remove working for families?
Well, that's, I mean, that's why it, that is
for the cabinet to decide the various trade-offs.
The point is, is that continuing
to kick the can down the road as the government is, I mean,
I think that it is quite disgraceful, um, that
the, uh, overly emotive language employed by the minister,
um, on the whole bruhaha around the debate
and, um, trying to frame this as human misery.
Human misery right now, uh, is a sluggish economy
and people being unable to afford the groceries
as a direct result of this government not following
through on its promise, on, on its promise
to tackle the costs of government
and the explosion of government, um, spending
that occurred under COVID.
Yeah. Okay. Well, I think respectfully
dis disagree with you on that.
Thanks Chair.
Uh, what's your response, um, Jordan
and colleagues, um, to the Minister of Finances, uh,
objectives that she restated at the economics forum at in
Waikato a week or two ago?
One, to return the operating balance to surplus by 28 29 2
to to place net core crown debt on a downward track toward
40% of GDP and three to rebuild fiscal resilience.
So future governments have options when the next shock
inevitably arrives.
James, you you were at that conference.
Did you want to take this?
Yeah, I mean, I, I, I think from our perspective,
I think those are very difficult things to disagree with in
that it would be clearly a priority of, of this government
and the government next term to get back to surplus.
But I mean, looking at fu uh, we've seen the pathway
to surplus slipped back three times in just two years now.
It's a very admirable goal.
Again, uh, the, this, the finance minister sort
of planned pathway back to surplus, not just
where treasury projects we will be,
but they've planned pathway back
to surplus has slipped back another year in this BPS.
It's very well and good to talk fiscal credibility.
It's, it's, it's a lot harder to deliver on that.
And that's, that's really what we'd like to see.
And again, on, on the other hand, we've got the debt, uh,
even, even getting net core crown debt beneath 40%
would still leave it over twice as high as it was as a share
of the economy pre 2018.
Now, you know, seven, eight years.
It's not a long time, but it's,
it's a marked shift in our fiscal outlook.
And, and frankly, I think we need to go further
and faster than just aiming for 40% of GDP
because at 10% of GDP per decade, per well dealing
with economic shocks, that leaves us in a very,
very vulnerable position as,
as the treasury secretary himself
said at the economic store.
And you must have been encouraged
with the operating allowance that, um, the Minister
of Finance announced that $2.4 billion IE the new money, uh,
the additional money that budget, um, 26 will, will get.
Um, that's, that's in some cases, uh, a third of
what a previous finance minister, uh, Robertson, um, had.
Uh, surely that's encouraging to your organization.
It's still more than Bill English. Yeah.
And we're in a much worse, we're in a much worse situation.
This is, this is truly bizarre with respect, Mr. Chair.
I mean, my organization's taken a lot of heat
from the current, um, from members of the current cabinet
for pointing out what are simply the facts
that the rhetoric does not match the action.
And I'm not gonna be a apologetic of it.
In fact, I'm getting quite irritated by calls from, um,
members, uh, of the cabinet, um, to me
and to key stakeholders saying, you know,
Ty ho the oth the other side is worse.
Well, no, I'm sorry. The me the the yardstick
for which we hold the government up to is the yardstick.
It set itself during the campaign last year.
You know, there's a wonderful, um, quote from Ronald Reagan,
you know, um, uh, dance with the one that brung you.
And it said at the, at, at c pack in about,
and I think it was at 86, where, you know,
this government seems to have really forgotten the
organizations and the people
and individuals in effort
that fought the last government tooth
and nail for what it was doing
and arguing that a very marginal improvement, um, is some,
uh, somehow, uh, somehow, um, justifies itself on the basis
that the other side may be worse.
What would, what would T-P-T-P-U do as far
as our blowout on superannuation?
Universal superannuation costs going from 25 billion
to over 70 billion in the next 25 years?
Well, our chair happened to be the last Minister
of finance that last adjusted, um, the age of super.
And I would encourage you to, um, have a chat to, uh, your,
to the minister who I understand is very well informed on
our excellent report, um, that, um, called the pathway to,
uh, back to surplus.
Uh, and the ta, your Humble Taxpayers Union will be doing an
alternate budget that demonstrates, um, a, uh, a surplus,
um, based on nothing other than Jacinda Ard Dunn's, um,
2019 wellbeing budget that I think would be very difficult
for anyone to say is, um, would result in human misery.
Yeah. And your chair, uh, Mr. Williams would also, uh,
be aware that she was operating in a first pass.
The post Environment national's policy is to incrementally,
uh, over the medium to long term lift the superannuation
age, but we live in a coalition arrangement
And that coal and when else in our lifetime, Mr.
Chair, are we gonna have an MMP government where all three
partners were elected on a commitment to reduce spending.
Okay. And yet it still hasn't happened.
Okay. Uh, Ryan Hamilton, final question.
Oh, thanks, chair. Look, just to be clear, Jordan,
when I asked you what would be a key fiscal plank,
essentially, you mentioned working for families.
So is it, is it true then that you, your key plank
or message for us is to reduce working for families
for the 600,000 plus Kiwis currently receiving Kiwi kids
currently receiving that?
No. You must have misheard my answer.
I made clear that that is an option
and we have laid out a number of options in that, in
that paper, more than happy to, to share it with the,
uh, with the committee.
Um, and you said, well, you know, that
that has particular costs.
Look, all of 'em have costs. I mean, an obvious one.
Um, I mean, I personally, my preferred, um,
first option would be that the Prime Minister
and the Minister of Finance has spoken at length about the
merits of asset recycling.
And even, uh,
in the announcement two weeks ago on the LPG terminal, um,
that doesn't appear to have even been, uh,
an option considered to sell down some of the, what is it,
$13.8 billion worth
of energy assets on the government's books
to recycle back into, um, a piece of infrastructure
that is probably necessary.
Um, the fact that those are options aren't even being
considered, you know, we can, we can pick up the very worst
and, and turn that into a caricature of, you know, that,
that they're, um, they wanna do X, Y,
and Z 'cause it's presented as an option.
Well, that of, of course, we're gonna present options.
There are better ones.
Um, but that is for cabinet to decide.
The fact is that this government, all three parties
were elected on very clear commitments, uh, to reduce
the cost burden of the state
or reduce the size of the state.
And it has failed.
And it's, you know, the message of, oh,
but it's MMPI, I'm sorry, um, uh,
doesn't pass muster
because again, even even New Zealand first,
there's multiple speeches where Winston Peters
demonstrate he gets the, he gets the problem.
Okay. Members, any other questions, uh,
for Jordan Williams and his team?
Okay, thank you, uh, to thank you Mr.
Bay Union for appearing before us today.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Thank you for your time. Okay.
Uh, Mr. Clark, have we got, uh, Carolyn Young
CE of Retail New Zealand?
I,
Yes, I'm here.
Yep, we have Carolyn. Thank you.
And thank you for the advocacy that you continue to do.
Thank you for your patience. 'cause I know we're running it
seven minutes late, so thank you.
Will make make a start.
Um, look, uh, we wrote a, a note to the committee about,
um, the issue of illicit tobacco in New Zealand
and the impact, excuse me, that that could have
on our smoke-free, smoke-free 2025 ambitions of having,
you know, less than 5% of New Zealanders smoking,
which we think is a really great thing
that we all want to achieve.
We know that smoking is very harmful to your health,
and we know that, uh, retail crime is very bad
for our communities.
Uh, so, you know, reducing smoking
and reducing retail crime is really important.
What we know that is that there is, um, a market
of illicit tobacco in New Zealand.
So the latest data is, um, about 18 months old.
It says that there's 24% of cigarettes, um,
in New Zealand are illicit.
And, uh, what we know by looking
to our neighbors in Australia is that they have about 75
to 80% of tobacco as illicit in Australia.
And as a result, they have a very high level
of violent and aggressive crime in communities.
And what we are proposing is that we'd like to
get together a task force to work on,
we've got a draft paper we're working on,
but actually understand better
what we can learn from Australia to ensure
that we don't end up in the same place as
where they are now.
So, um, you know why we were just having a meeting earlier.
The most popular brand
of cigarettes in Australia is a brand called Manchester.
Um, and they're imported from overseas,
and they're not actually legal tobacco,
but they're the most popular brand.
Uh, we know that there's been over 125 fire bombs.
There's been, you know, it is a gang, it's a run
by gangs and organized crime.
It's an international piece and it's very complex.
Uh, in New Zealand.
Customs control the border,
so any illicit tobacco comes in through the border.
We understand customs priority is drugs and
therefore a lot of the illicit may not be
a priority for customs.
Once the cigarettes are inside New Zealand,
it's no longer a priority for them once it's in New Zealand,
you know, the police, it's not their gig necessarily,
and Ministry of Health, um,
their role is quite a different role
and they don't have the skills and,
and people to go through an enforcement regime.
So we think there's a whole piece
that we need to think about.
You know, vaping is a registered license space,
but anyone can sell tobacco.
So, you know, is the settings right there, um,
is the ex size tax at the right level
to ensure it's a deterrent
and, um, encourages a smoke-free outcome.
You know, where is the right places?
And yeah, there's a whole economic study
to be done on those sort of spaces,
but what we're really looking at is making sure
that we can meet the smoke free targets that we, um,
have less, we don't have an acceleration of retail crime
and that our communities are healthier.
Okay, very good. Uh, Todd Stevenson Act.
Oh, thank you Caroline. Thank you for that.
Uh, and thank you for bringing actually this topic
around illicit tobacco to the committee.
Uh, I can tell you where,
where Australia went wrong is they actually got the exit ice
tax completely wrong.
And they've, and what they've done is they've now made it
so cigarettes, legal cigarettes so expensive
that no one wants to buy them.
So I think that's a really sobering warning
for public policy makers.
But look, I would fully support, um, you know,
you getting together a bit of a, if a round table,
whatever you would like to say, because yeah, the, the,
we cannot tax our way out of this problem anymore.
And you've obviously put up some other solutions
and there are others, but that for me is a red flag
that people think we can just keep increasing the exercise
tax on, on tobacco.
That's gonna sort it out. It is not.
Absolutely. There's a really weird point.
So what happened, of course,
is in Australia they had a 12% exercise tax
that kept in incre increasing at 12
point half percent every year.
And cigarettes are sort
of 55 60 Australian dollars a packet.
Illicit tobacco is as low as 10 to, you know, not,
we've heard eight to 12 $15.
We know that in New Zealand you can buy illicit tobacco
for $13
and it's been sold quite blatantly in a number
of outlets across Auckland.
And also we know someone, so we just wanna make sure
that we don't end up in that same space
and we don't have that crime that they have in Australia
where they've got much less exercise they're collecting in
an increasing smoking rate.
No, thank you Caroline.
And it's become a big business for the gangs,
which we do not want to happen here.
And we all, we all support the goal of stopping smoking
and yes, um, yeah, reducing that,
but we've just gotta make sure we do it
with the right public policy settings. Thank you,
Carolyn. Just one
from me. Retail fifth seems
to be tracking in the right direction, anecdotally
and empirically.
Is that the evidence that you are seeing
on the ground? Yeah,
The, the data out of Aura, so at the bigger end
of town is a 9% drop over the last year.
Some businesses are doing better than others
and it is a, a multi-pronged approach.
There's no one solution to retail crime,
so you've got a wide range of things.
The police are doing an amazing job
and, um, the National Crime Unit,
the national retail crime unit is working really well.
The police commission has put in retail crime units across
all of the districts really helping.
And so we're having some really great outcomes from the,
that space and, and, you know, using data
and, um, tools for the police to, to, um,
link a number of offenses to one offender so
that we can get people in front of courts for all of the,
the actions they're taking, not just one or two.
So yeah, we're just seeing some, starting to see
a turn in the dial in the right direction.
Yeah, no, those Bobby's on the beats
and the town centers, we're certainly seeing some,
some good numbers coming out.
Henderson for one is the latest.
Uh, some great stats coming outta that.
Hey, thank you so much. Thank you
for your ongoing advocacy, Carolyn.
Killer. Thank you. Thank you.
Okay, that, uh, takes us to the Opportunity party.
Um, it's leader Ms. Wong.
Ah, here she is.
Hello. Welcome.
Uh, thank you for your, uh, submission
and we look forward to, um, your 10 minute presentation.
Leave us some time for some questions if
possible. So welcome.
Thank you, and thank you
for the chance to speak with you today.
Um, so my name is QE Wong, the leader
of the Opportunity Party.
Um, and while we are not in parliament, we hope
that our submission, uh,
on the budget policy statement highlights the approach
that we would bring, um, to the house.
This is an approach that puts in front of New Zealanders,
the kind of long term evidence backed solutions
that don't always neatly fit into three year political
cycles, but we believe are essential if our kids are going
to inherit a unified in innovative
and nature focused country.
Firstly, I want to address the challenge
of the operating deficit.
Um, the budget policy statement is honest about this New
Zealand's fiscal position is challenging.
Core crown expenses have risen faster than revenue
for years, and the operating balance has been in deficit
since, uh, 19 20 20 19 20 20 20.
Treasury now estimates
that the structural operating deficit is at a, uh, at
around 2.7% of GDP.
Um, and we believe this is not a cyclical blip
that will disappear when the economy improves Opportunity
agrees that the status quo quo is unsustainable,
but we reject the idea that New Zealand can cut its way
to fiscal health without inflicting a level of human
and social damage that New Zealanders will not
and should not tolerate.
When governments ruled out serious conversations about
revenue and structural reform,
they're left chasing relatively small amounts of money
through cuts that are highly visible
and deeply painful for specific communities.
Um, on infrastructure funding specifically,
and we wanted to touch on this given, uh, the recent
national infrastructure plan that has been released, um,
this makes a stark point
that we already spend over $20 billion a year on
infrastructure, yet on a dollar for dollar basis.
We get less value than many of our peers
and we face decades of catch up in climate related costs.
Opportunity welcomes the plan's core message.
Um, the problem is not just how much we spend,
but how we plan, sequence
and deliver the 16 recommendations from planning What we can
afford to looking after what we've got
to prioritizing the right projects
and making it easier to build are exactly the kind
of system fixes that politicians have dodged in the past.
But a plan on paper is not enough.
It must actually shape budget choices, capital allowances,
and how this Parliament scrutinizes projects some
of New Zealand's balance sheet remains relatively strong
by international standards.
And T Wang's own work implies
that public infrastructure investment will need
to increase over coming decades to clear the deficit,
meet population needs,
and respond to climate change that cannot be done
with a fiscal, with within a fiscal mindset
that treats every uptick in net debt as a failure regardless
of the quality and lifespan of the assets we are building.
It also cannot be done if every election resets the pipeline
and really litigates the same projects
opportunity urges the committee
and this government to explicitly anchor their thinking in,
in the national infrastructure plan.
And for us, that means three things.
First, uh,
tie medium term capital allowances in the budget policy
statement to the plan's indicative spending paths
and priorities rather than letting them drift
with short-term political pressures.
Second, legislate
for genuinely non-partisan infrastructure pipeline
that reflects the plan's priorities
and is updated regularly so that investors, councils, iwi
and communities can plan with confidence.
And third, use the plan's emphasis on planning
what we can afford to have an honest conversation about
revenue and financing, including judicious use of crown debt
and where appropriate user charges
and pricing tools like congestion and time of use charging.
If we want resilient three water systems,
climate resilient transport modern hospitals,
and the energy infrastructure needed
for a low emissions economy, we have to stop pretending
that we can have Scandinavian quality infrastructure
on a tax base and debt tolerance closer
to the bottom of the OECD.
Uh, to follow on that, on the topic of tax, um,
for more than a decade, the OECD has told New Zealand
that our tax base is too narrow
and relies too heavily on taxing work
and transactions rather than wealth and property.
Successive governments have nodded parked a working group
or two and then backed away at the first
sign of political heat.
And the result is a glaring gap.
We continue to treat most track capital gains,
especially those arising from land
and housing, far more generously than income
from wages and salaries.
This is not only unfair on younger
and renting New Zealanders, it also distorts
where capital flows in our economy,
locking billions into existing re residential property
rather than productive investment that could lift wages
and exports opportunities.
Position is clear and long standing on this,
we favor a comprehensive land value tax, coupled
with an overhaul of the income tax system built
around a citizen's income.
This combination allows us to broaden the tax base,
reduce distortions that favor, speculation,
and increase overall progressivity so that low
and middle income New Zealanders are better off.
In net terms, a land value tax focuses on the unimproved
value of the land, not buildings,
and cannot be avoided
by clever structuring or shifting assets.
Offshore. International evidence shows that land taxes are
among the least distortionary raise ways to raise revenue
because land cannot flee, hide or shrink in response to tax.
In New Zealand's case, it directly targets the area
where we have had extraordinary untaxed gains residential
land values By using the revenue to fund a citizen's income
and flatten and simplify income tax opportunities approach
ensures that most ordinary working households see more cash
in their pocket even
as the crown's overall revenue position strengthens.
That is the trade off. We think New Zealanders will accept
if politicians are honest with them.
Pay tax on unearned windfalls from land,
get security simplicity, and a fairer shot for everyone.
Thirdly, on productivity and value creation.
Uh, treasury and the BPS rightly emphasize
that lifting productivity is the only durable way
to raise living standards and sustain core public services.
But we cannot get there.
Built on a growth model, built on rising house prices,
extraction of finite natural resources
and investment in science skills
and innovation, we see three big levers here.
First, address the tax distortions
that bias investment toward housing rather
than productive enterprise.
A land value tax and citizens' income, as of explained,
does more than close the fiscal gap that rewires incentives
so that entrepreneurs, exporters
and innovators are competing on a fairer footing
with property speculators.
Second, commit
to a credible evidence-based infrastructure pipeline.
As of also outlined, this will have a myriad
of benefits across both public
and private infrastructure markets.
Energy is a great example.
Without a stable government committed
to regulatory structures
and a long-term strategy,
we will not see the robust investment in generation,
transmission and storage that we need to realize the clean,
abundant energy future that New Zealanders deserve.
And third, support the micro level changes
that international evidence shows matter.
Stable strategic funding for science
and research with a specific focus on turning ideas into
businesses, exports, and good jobs.
The scaling of our great ideas is massively underfunded at
the moment, meaning our innovators are all too often lured
overseas to expand their businesses.
Competition reform in sectors like banking, supermarkets,
and building supplies where high concentration
and margins are a drag on both consumers and productivity
and targeted firm level support for r
and d management capability, technology adoption,
and workforce skills, particularly for our SMEs
that are the backbone of this country.
To summarize, our recommendations
to this committee are first
to address the structural deficit honestly,
by broadening the tax base in particular
through a comprehensive land value tax, paired
with a universal income-based restructure
of personal income tax.
Second, invest in New Zealand's long-term future
by endorsing a non-partisan transparent infrastructure
pipeline and supporting higher crown capital expenditure on
renewable energy, climate adaptation,
and critical economic infrastructure.
And third, establish a credible long-term productivity plan
that brings together tax reform, energy sector reform
and investment competition, policy science
and innovation funding and firm level capability support.
New Zealanders are being asked
to accept tighter operating spending,
slower improvements in public services,
and an extended timetable for returning to surplus.
They deserve a plan that is equally candid about
where new revenue will come from
and how today's sacrifices will build a more resilient,
more productive and fairer economy.
Tomorrow opportunity is ready
and to work with any party in this house that is prepared
to confront these realities
and make the case for genuine structural change.
Our message is simple.
Be honest with the public, be ambitious for our future,
and don't waste this fiscal fiscal crisis
by tinkering at the edges nui.
Okay. Okay. Well thank you to the leader of the top party.
Um, any comments or questions?
Members obviously made yourself loud
and clear, so thank you for your submission and,
and all the best for the coming months.
Thank you. Okay. Hey, thanks Ms. Well, thank you.
Okay, that leads us to the, uh, children's commissioner,
um, Dr.
Claire Mund. If, if Dr.
Claire is here, I seem
to have a few children running behind me,
banging on the window, so that keeps it real.
Yes, I see you Mr. Tim.
Yeah, thank you Commissioner. We
look forward to your presentation.
Greetings to all members of the committee this afternoon.
As Children's commissioner, I'm pleased
to have this opportunity
to discuss the budget policy statement with you today
As the independent statutory advocate
for all children under the age of 18, and all children
and young people under the age of 25 who have been in
or who are in the care and
or custody of the state,
I take a keen interest in the budget policy statement.
This is because the government's, uh,
budget decisions have a significant
and direct impact in the daily lives of children
and young people and on their everyday experience
of their rights and on their futures.
What is in the best interests of children
to meet their needs and to uphold their rights, uh,
is simply not, uh, a nice to do.
It is something that, uh,
the government should have at the forefront
of its mind when developing the budget
and making substantive budget decisions about
how public money will be spent.
This is because New Zealand is, uh, a duty bound
as a state's party under the UN convention on the rights
of the child to take all possible measures
and a quote here from Article four
of the children's conviction to the maximum extent
of their available resources to mobilize, allocate,
and spend sufficient financial resources
to realize all children's rights.
As children's Commissioner, I am very clear
that the budget has the potential
to impact on all children experiencing
a strong start in life, the opportunities that children have
to grow up safe and well, and thriving families
and whanau in getting to participate in the things
that matter to them in their lives.
And this is why in my view,
the budget policy statement is crucial to set that framework
of spending of public monies.
The government has also recently signed up
to the United Nations Pact for the future
and the Declaration on Future Generations.
That is a good thing.
And in signing onto the Declaration on Future Generations,
the government of New Zealand has agreed
to invest in the social and economic development of children
and young people so they can reach their full potential.
They have agreed to prioritize the needs
of future generations in policy and decision making,
and to safeguard children's futures, the futures
of those future generations.
The government's budget, policy
and budget decision making must reflect its active
responsibility to prioritize the needs
and rights of children today
and of New Zealand's future generations of children
and young people in order to give effect
to its duty bearer obligations under the UN convention
on the rights of the child.
The government should also be actively seeking the input
of children themselves during the budget development process
to ensure that budget decisions better reflect their
experiences and their priorities,
and so that the impact of public expenditure can be enduring
and have positive impact in children's lives over time.
This aligns with their right under the UN convention on the
rights of the child under Article 12 to be heard on matters
that affect them and for their views to be given due weight
and consideration.
I note that other countries are already moving forward
with involving children in the budget development process
consistent with the UN Committee on the rights
of the child's general comment number 19,
but New Zealand is still lagging behind in this regard.
My key overarching message
to you today on the budget policy statement is that I don't
yet see that this budget policy statement makes
children a priority.
I'm advocating today for the government
through its budget policy statement
and associated budget decision making
to prioritize children, make children
and their everyday experiences
of their rights a budget 2026 priority
so their needs can be met in real terms.
With the remainder of my comments today, I'm now going
to hone in on why child poverty
reduction should be a key focus on of budget 2026
and why it's urgent
that this is reflected in the budget policy statement.
This Thursday stats NZ is due
to release the official child poverty statistics
for the year 24 25,
a requirement under the Child Poverty Reduction Act 2018.
Based on what I'm seeing
and the considerable amount of time
that I spend out in communities around the country
with children, young people with families
and whanau, I'm concerned that this Thursday we are going
to see increases in the numbers of children affected
by poverty reflected in those official statistics.
The reality is that life is really tough right now
for thousands of children and their families
and whanau due to the cost of living crisis, unemployment,
a range of other factors,
and the fact that we simply haven't, uh,
put enough focus on reducing poverty
affecting children in this country.
Over successive terms of government,
the recently released Salvation Army State
of the Nation Report Foundations
of Wellbeing evidences this.
It is describing to us a confronting picture
of worsening child poverty, high costs of living,
and increased family violence in our communities.
I want to make it absolutely clear
that while poverty is not determinative of negative outcomes
for children, the evidence does show us that when families
and whanau are under significant financial pressure, stress
and instability rise in households
where children are present.
And we know that when households are struggling,
children are generally struggling too.
Children and young people across all age groups are
consistently telling me
and my team that one of the most important things
to them is having their essential needs met, such as,
and I quote, affordable clothes and food,
and I quote again, a roof over your head.
And as one child has told us, quote, you need
to get in early as soon as you see people struggling.
I tole that comment.
And I also strongly advocate for better early help
and better prevention efforts to prevent material
hardship in the lives of children from
occurring in the first place.
Considering the realities of life for children in our small,
relatively rich nation,
and the fact that reducing child material hardship is one
of the three priorities listed by the government
and its child and youth strategy.
I am surprised and I am concerned
that reducing child material hardship is not a priority in
the budget policy statement for 2026.
It simply should be so
that our nation's children can grow up safe and well
and reach their full potential rather than
struggling to survive.
New Zealand's children should be supported to thrive
in reducing child material hardship must be a priority under
budget 2026.
And lastly, I want to emphasize to you
that investing in reducing child poverty makes
good economic sense.
Increased government investment into reducing child material
hardship is likely to deliver positive long-term fiscal
and economic outcomes for New Zealand.
These outcomes are consistent
with the government's stated objectives
and the budget policy statement, uh,
to support a more productive
and sustainable economy showing that the opportunity
to reduce child material hardship must be taken in budget
2026 A can't emphasize enough
that the rights needs
and outcomes of New Zealand's children depend on this.
Thank you. Thank you, commissioner.
Uh, uh, I'm gonna go to Dr. Deborah Russell.
Um, thank you for that and for your, your work
and your advocacy for children.
Um, I'm not quite sure what, what,
what's the age range you take as being a child?
What, what, at what stage do I do have a follow up?
Depending on your answer. Yeah,
Sure. Um, so
in terms of children,
that is all people under the age of 18.
And then my mandate does extend, um, up
to young people under the age of 25 who have been in
or who are in the care or custody of the state.
Thank you. Um, great to get that clarification.
Um, uh, we know families are doing it tough out there.
Are you seeing, um, some older children, sort
of young adults, um,
and, you know, the 15, 16, 17 year olds, um, uh,
taking on jobs in order to help support their families.
Is that part of what's going on out there?
Yes, absolutely.
I think, um, a a lot of young people,
so 15, 16, 17 year olds who are still at high school,
when I meet with them in communities around the country,
they talk to me about their part-time jobs that they have.
Um, some children
and young people talk to me about the fact that they are,
are needing to take on that work to support their families
and whanau who are struggling.
Uh, and they talked to me about those different pressures
that that brings into their own lives while they're juggling
their learning at school in Kura, um,
with their part-time work.
Um, I'm also aware that, you know, through the pandemic, um,
we did have some children
and young people who, uh, had to, uh, leave school, um,
to take on, uh, work to support their families in Wau.
Um, these things are factors that we need
to be paying attention to,
to understand those different pressures in the lives
of families in whanau.
And we need to be doing whatever we can
through things like the budget
and through policy settings that are going to alleviate some
of those stresses and pressures off families and whanau
and ultimately off their children.
Thank you. Okay, we'll leave it at that.
Commissioner, thank you for your, um,
support ongoingly off the, uh, life jackets bill too.
Compulsory life jackets for children that's going
through the transport committee.
We appreciate their advocacy as well.
Thank you. Okay, members, uh, that is the end
of our public hearings, uh, for the, um, uh,
budget policy statement, uh, 2026, Mr. Clark, do we need to,
um, go into private for anything, uh,
or can we discuss that next week
when we are back in parliament?
Um, if you wanna discuss the report
before you look at it, then you need to go into private now.
Okay. Members, does anyone wanna discuss, uh, the,
our report for the, um, budget policy statement,
or can we just say that, um, say by, uh, Monday
or, uh, uh, no, it is Monday, say by the end of the week,
uh, that we get any comments
or direction, um, to, uh, to our clerk's office as far
as the drafting of our report?
We happy with that. Thank you. Okay. Thank you so much.
We'll, we'll see you next week back in parliament.
Thank you. Bye everyone. Thank you, chair. Thank you.